The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hernani, by Victor Hugo

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Hernani

Author: Victor Hugo

Release Date: February, 2006 [EBook #9976]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on November 5, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO Latin-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERNANI ***




Produced by Stan Goodman, Anne Dreze, Marc D'Hooghe and the PG
Online Distributed Proofreaders.









HERNANI

A DRAMA BY VICTOR HUGO


_EDITED WITH NOTES AND AN ESSAY ON VICTOR HUGO_
BY GEORGE McLEAN HARPER, PH.D.
Professor of Romance Languages in
Princeton University




PREFACE.


The text of this edition is the same as that of the _edition
definitive_, Paris, 1880. The unusual length of the introduction will
be pardoned, it is hoped, in view of the paucity of general reviews of
modern French literature that are available for students in schools
and some colleges. It contains the matter which I should require a
class of my own to get up for examination in connection with reading
this play or any other of Hugo's works. The Historical Note is a
necessity, and is introduced before the play to save students from
confusion and waste of time.

Mr. H.A. Perry and Dr. John E. Matzke, in their editions of "Hernani",
have so thoroughly annotated it that it has been impossible to avoid
the appearance of following them very closely; and there are indeed
several notes for which I am directly indebted to them. Without their
indications, I should in other cases have been obliged to spend a
great deal more time in looking up references than has been necessary.
It would be unfair to Dr. Matzke, in particular, not to pay tribute to
the completeness of his notes, which leave his successor little chance
for originality.

GEORGE McLEAN HARPER. PRINCETON UNIVERSITY June 16, 1894.




VICTOR HUGO.


For American and English readers who are at all well informed about
modern European literature the name of Victor Hugo stands out more
prominently than any other as representing the intellectual life of
France since the fall of Napoleon. Even the defects of his character
are by many considered typically French. They see him excessively
conceited, absurdly patriotic, a too voluminous producer of very
varied works; and it is not unusual to find that such readers believe
him to be all the more French for these peculiarities. It would open
their eyes if they should read what M. Ferdinand Brunetiere, the most
authoritative French critic of our generation, says of Victor Hugo.
They would be surprised, if they conversed with intelligent Frenchmen
generally, to hear their opinions of him. Indeed if they had a wider
acquaintance with French letters and French character they would not
need M. Brunetiere or any other guide, because they would feel for
themselves that Hugo must seem to the French just as peculiar, just as
phenomenal, as he does to foreigners. For it is only to superficial
readers that French literature can appear to be in the main frivolous
or eccentric. Dignity is not necessarily severe. It cannot be heavy;
indeed, grace is of its essence. And dignity is the note of French
literature in the seventeenth century, its Augustan age. To say that
seriousness is the note of the eighteenth-century literature in France
may sound less axiomatic, but I think it is even more true. No men
are more serious than those who believe it to be their mission to
revolutionize and reform society. We may not now take Diderot and
Voltaire and Rousseau as seriously as they took themselves; but that
is partly because their purposes have been to a large extent achieved,
and the result is an old story to us. The note of the nineteenth
century in French literature is harder to catch, perhaps cannot be
caught; for the voices are many, and we are too near the stage. But
if anything is evident it is that this epoch is marked by severe and
conscientious industry. Criticism has been developed into an almost
perfect instrument for quick, sure testing of literary claims. A
perverse book may, through neglect, through its insignificance, or
indeed through its very absurdity, find a large number of gentle
readers in England or America. In France less favor would be shown
it. The artistic sense is more widely diffused there; life centres
in Paris, where values can be readily compared; and, above all, the
custom of personal journalism prevails in France. A man is not going
to waste his time in reading a new book if the critic most competent
to judge condemns it over his own signature in the morning paper.
And if a new book is so insignificant that no critic reviews it, the
condemnation of silence is even more annihilating. Then, too, the
competition for literary honors is intense. The rewards are greater
than in any other country: a seat in the Academy; a professor's chair
in the College de France; an office of dignity and pecuniary value
under government; the knowledge that a successful French book
will sell from St. Petersburg to Madrid, and from Amsterdam to
Constantinople--all over the world, in fact; for in nearly every
country people read two languages--their own and French. In this
competition it may not always be the best-written books that come to
the front; but the chance of their doing so is immensely greater than
elsewhere. And another beneficial result is the careful toil bestowed
upon the preparation of books, the training to which authors submit
themselves, the style and finish, the lopping off of eccentricities
and crudities, the infinite pains, in short, which a writer will take
when he knows that his fate depends on his pleasing first of all a
select and cultivated audience of _connoisseurs_. No journeyman work
will do.

It was by such a tribunal that Victor Hugo was judged, long before his
name was known outside of France. And yet, although the popular voice
has been immensely favorable to him for two generations, this high
court of criticism has not decided the case. The position of Victor
Hugo is by no means definitely established, as Alfred de Musset's is
established, and Balzac's. But, whatever be the verdict, Victor Hugo,
because of the power and quantity of his work, and his long life,
certainly is the most imposing figure of this century in French
literature.

It is often a questionable proceeding to make one man's life and works
interpret for us the doings of his contemporaries, to try to find in
one term the expression for a whole series of events. It is the most
convenient method, to be sure, but not on that account the most
reliable. When therefore I remembered that Victor Hugo entered into
prominence only a little after the beginning of our century, and that
although dead he yet speaks, for the definitive edition of his works
is not completed, and every year adds new volumes of posthumous books
to that enormous succession; when I perceived how convenient it would
be to make him the central and distributive figure of this whole epoch
in French literary history,--I regarded the chronological coincidence
rather as a temptation than as a help, and resolved not to yield to
the solicitations of a mere facile arrangement. For I had no great
belief in Victor Hugo's fitness to be called the representative and
interpreter of his age. I was under the influence of the prevailing
Anglo-Saxon opinion of him as an egoist, whom even the impulsions of
his mighty genius could not break loose from absorbed contemplation of
self.

Even a critic so appreciative of national differences as Lowell
expressed this opinion when he said: "In proportion as solitude
and communion with self lead the sentimentalist to exaggerate the
importance of his own personality, he comes to think that the least
event connected with it is of consequence to his fellow-men. If he
change his shirt, he would have mankind aware of it. Victor Hugo, the
greatest living representative of the class, considers it necessary to
let the world know by letter from time to time his opinions on every
conceivable subject about which it is not asked nor is of the least
value unless we concede to him an immediate inspiration."

Let us take another of these estimates, which might well deter one
from considering Hugo as capable of representing any body of men or
any mass of life. I quote Mr. W. E. Henley, in "Views and Reviews", a
little volume of bright and suggestive "appreciations", as he calls
them: "All his life long he was addicted to attitude; all his
life long he was a _poseur_ of the purest water. He seems to have
considered the affectation of superiority an essential quality in art;
for just as the cock in Mrs. Poyser's Apothegm believed that the sun
got up to hear him crow, so to the poet of the "Legende" and the
"Contemplations" it must have seemed as if the human race existed but
to consider the use he made of his oracular tongue."

These are but two of the many expressions of disgust anybody may
encounter in reading English or American criticism of Victor Hugo. But
not discouraged by such estimates, and fortifying myself rather with
the thought of how the French themselves esteem him, I began to read
Victor Hugo again with a view of determining whether or not he
could be accepted as the unifying representative, the continuous
interpreter, of French literature since the fall of Napoleon. And as a
result I can say that, for me, this one man's life and works formulate
nearly all the phenomena of French literary history from the battle
of Waterloo down to the present day. Except comedy and the realistic
novel, be has excelled in every kind of literature which the
French have cultivated during this century. With these two notable
exceptions, he has been a champion, a precursor, what the Germans call
a _Vorfechter_, in every great literary movement.

Nothing more deplorable can be conceived than the intellectual
condition of France under the First Empire. The fine ideals of the
young republic were a laughingstock, a butt of saddest ridicule. For
there is nothing men hate so much as the thought of a pure ideal they
have once cherished and since shrunk away from; and the remembrance of
a lost opportunity to be one's true self is the bitterest of griefs;
and no reproach stings deeper than this, of a former and nobler state
of conscience which was not obeyed. Liberty was borne down under a
weight of circumstance all the more oppressive because it was
thought that the new order of things was the natural product of the
Revolution; and indeed it looked so. Literature was bidden to flourish
by the despot. He posed as a protector of the arts, and at his command
the seventeenth century was to begin again and a new Corneille, a new
Boileau, a new Moliere, were to adorn his reign. But he who conquered
Italy could not compel unwilling Minerva, and the victor of the
Pyramids could not reanimate a dead past. The writings of the period
1800-1815, indeed the whole intellectual life of that time, its art,
its music, its literature, its philosophy, are what might have been
expected.

After the downfall of Napoleon what intellectual ideals remained in
France? With what equipment of thoughts and moral forces did she set
out at the beginning of this new epoch? With no equipment that was at
all adequate for solving the staggering problems set for her to solve.
Just think of them! She had to deal with monarchy and a state church
all over again. She had to decide between the spirit of the old regime
and the spirit of '89. There was a contradiction in her past, and she
had to turn her back on one or the other fascinating epoch in her
history--either on Louis Quatorze and the _grand siecle_ with all its
glory of treasured acquirement, its shining names, its illustrious and
venerable institutions, or on the less attractive men and measures and
purposes of the Revolution; and these latter, though apparently less
worthy of proud contemplation, impressed the conscience and the
political sense as being the things fullest of life for the dawning
future. The most loyal conservative must have felt an awkward
consciousness that the things he hated would in the end prevail.

Such, then, was the intellectual condition of France in
1815--uncertainty and division and dearth of ideals and purposes,
in the face of a future full of perplexing problems. But she was
strangely hopeful. She has never been otherwise. The French are the
most elastic people in Europe, and no defeat has ever discouraged
them. And she was in love with herself as much as ever, and as fully
convinced of her right to the leading place among all nations. Indeed
it did not occur to her that she had ever surrendered that right.

What have been the principal lines of movement in French literature
since 1815? In order to answer this question we must not merely follow
the traces of political history and say that literature changed with
the government. Such a solution would be facile, but would do violence
to the facts. The matter is verv indeterminate, and the best way to
bring it into a clear arrangement is to ask ourselves who were the
influential writers of any given period and what did they stand for.
In 1815 there were three men prominent in French letters and life:
Chateaubriand, Lamartine, and Lamennais. Victor Hugo was born in 1802,
and by 1817 he had become a literary man, not by intention merely, but
by writing. He came upon the scene, therefore, when these three men
were at the height of their activity; for Chateaubriand was born in
1768, Lamartine in 1790, and Lamennais in 1782; and they, appreciating
the need of leadership in France under the newly restored monarchy,
had thrown themselves enthusiastically into the work of instructing
the people. Let us inquire who they were and what was the nature of
their activity; or, in other words, what was the first public literary
atmosphere that surrounded Victor Hugo.

Chateaubriand at the age of seventeen was a captain of cavalry under
Louis XVI. When the Revolution broke out he came to America on a
royal commission to find the northwest passage. He brought letters of
introduction to the chief personages of the new world, and was
much impressed with the simple and gracious reception given him by
Washington, and with his unpretentious mode of life. After the failure
of his geographical researches, the young officer plunged into the
forest and started alone, on foot, for the Southwest, his head full of
romantic ideas about the beauty of primitive civilization, or absence
of civilization, put there no doubt by Jean Jacques Rousseau, of whom
he was an ardent admirer and a disciple. We are told that one evening
in an Indian wigwam he discovered a torn page of an English newspaper
and read of the ravages of the Revolution and the flight and arrest
of Louis XVI. His loyalty was awakened, and after two years of
sentimental wanderings in the forests of the Mississippi valley he
returned to France and enlisted with the Royalists. They received him
with suspicion, and even after his recovery, in exile, from a severe
wound received in their cause, they refused him fellowship. He lived
in London and Belgium and the island of Jersey, composing his first
work, an "Essai sur les Revolutions", 1797, in which his ideas,
both of politics and of religion, are still in a line with those of
Rousseau. Shortly after its publication some inward experience of the
reality of life and its dependence upon God gave him an impulsion in a
new direction, and he began his great apology for the Christian faith,
entitled "Le Genie du Christianisme", 1802, of which "Atala" and
"Rene" are only episodes. At this time Napoleon was re-establishing
order, and as he considered religion necessary to political security,
and was just then courting the Pope, he showered favors upon the young
author, to the latter's manifest harm, for they made him fickle
and ambitious, and turned his natural sentimentality into the most
repulsive egoism. His masterpiece was "Les Martyrs", a sort of
Christian epic, which appeared in 1809; and thereafter he was regarded
as the leader in a conservative reaction back to Rome and back to
royalty.

Alphonse de Lamartine was a poet of greater significance, though
in his early years he stood in a secondary place, owing to
Chateaubriand's influence with the clerical and royalist party, and
indeed with all those who longed for peace and a revival of religious
faith in France. His early life was as interesting as Chateaubriand's,
and, like his, its years of transition from boyhood to active manhood
were spent in foreign lands. His poetry is characterized by a certain
softness and sweetness peculiar to itself, reminding one somewhat of
English Cowper. It is contemplative and religious; but that does not
say all, for its range is wide, and Wordsworth has demonstrated to us
what a world of thought and fancy there may be in meditative poetry.
The chief of his works are: the volume entitled "Les Meditations",
which contains that fine poem "Le Lac"; "Les Harmonies"; "Jocelyn";
"La Chute d'un Ange"; "Graziella"; "Voyage en Orient", and "L'Histoire
des Girondins". Lamartine succeeded in being a guide to his people in
so far as he attracted them by his beautiful verse to a more serious
contemplation of themselves and the world, to a renewed interest in
true religion, to an appreciation of the fact that Christianity was
still alive and capable of inspiring enthusiasm. The feeling had
prevailed in France that vital Christianity was incompatible with the
cultivation of the fine arts. Lamartine proved this to be untrue.
He failed, however, when it came to writing history or engaging in
politics, because, as Lowell long ago perceived, and as people now
generally acknowledge, Lamartine was a sentimentalist, that is, a man
who cultivated fine sentiments because they were beautiful and not
because they were right, and who performed fine actions to be seen of
men; in other words, an egoist, an artist spoiled by artificiality.
Apart, however, from all question of the intrinsic merit of his work,
his tendency was, like that of Chateaubriand, in the direction of
recognizing religion and looking back to monarchical rather than
republican France for inspiration and example.

Felicite de Lamennais lived a life whose details belong as much to the
history of philosophy, or to ecclesiastical history, as to that of
belles-lettres. First a priest, and the most ardent Catholic in
France, he afterward turned against Rome and led a movement towards
religious independence. There are few more interesting figures,
chiefly because great religious leaders have been so rare in modern
France. At the time when Victor Hugo was beginning to write, Lamennais
was ardently engaged in an effort to establish the supremacy of Rome,
not only over private conscience, but over political institutions, and
although from his subsequent actions he is known to the world as a
liberal and a heretic, yet at that time, having published in 1817 his
"Essai sur l'Indifference en Matiere de Religion", he was the most
jealous conservative and the most fiery churchman in France.

Thus a superficial glance has sufficed to show that the first movement
which stirred literary France after 1815 was a reaction in favor of
monarchy and Rome; that its champions were Chateaubriand, Lamartine,
and Lamennais; that its effort was mainly through poetry; that its
honor was its high political and moral purity; that its defect was its
sentimentality; that its ultimate inefficacy was due to its running
counter to the tendency of the age. Into this movement Victor Hugo
inevitably fell; by it he was for a long time carried; with it he at
first kept step bravely.

At this point let us take a glance at Victor Hugo's early life. He was
born in 1802, of respectable and educated parents. His father was an
army officer of increasing distinction under the Empire; his mother a
sympathizer with the exiled Bourbons. During Victor's early childhood
he, with his mother and brothers, moved about through Italy, following
his father's campaignings under Joseph Bonaparte; but when the boys
were old enough to attend school their mother took them to Paris,
while the father fought through a guerilla war against the brigands
headed by Fra Diavolo. After several years of tranquillity in France,
Madame Hugo and her sons were again called to follow the fortunes
of the head of the family, this time in Spain. The father won a
generalship in the French army in that conquered country, and became
majordomo of the palace at Madrid. The boys attended school in a
college for noblemen's sons, and were badly treated by the young
Spaniards, who could not forget that the French lads were the children
of one of their conquerors. But after a brief sojourn in Spain they
returned to Paris, and there the poet-life of Victor Hugo began, and
began in earnest; for during three years, at school and at home, he
composed verses of all sorts, and in 1817, in competition for a prize
offered by the National Academy, he wrote an ode which, although not
successful in the contest, brought him into public notice.

The next year he won a prize in the Floral Games of Toulouse, with a
poem which is published among his other works, and which is one of the
most remarkable productions of precocious genius known to literary
history. In 1821 he had his first taste of the bitterness of life,
and his boyhood came to an abrupt termination, in the death of his
excellent mother. On the same day he became engaged to a young girl
who had for a long time been his schoolmate and almost a member of
his own home-circle. Her parents allowed his suit, but postponed the
marriage until he should have proved himself capable of supporting a
family. He set to work with feverish ardor and undertook almost every
kind of literary production--odes, plays, novels. The first of his
successes under this new stimulus were two remarkable stories, "Bug
Jargal" and "Han d'Islande", stories which indicate a strange and
exuberant imagination, tropical in its fervor, its singularity, its
fecundity.

But it was in 1826, by the publication of his "Odes et Ballades", that
he laid the real corner-stone of his fame. The king, Louis XVIII,
liked the poems, for a natural reason, as we shall see, and gave their
author a pension of one thousand francs, which in those days, and
in economical France, seemed a large sum, and the young people were
permitted to marry. It will be interesting to observe what was the
character of the "Odes et Ballades". They are almost all political
and religious, and all thoroughly conservative; all in praise of the
Bourbons, condemnatory of the Revolution; silent as to Napoleon, or
nearly so, and glowing with devotion to the Roman Catholic Church.
They remind us of what Wordsworth twenty-five years earlier wrote,
in a precisely contrary spirit, when he was influenced by the hopes
inspired by the first events of 1789, and before the subsequent
outrages changed him into a stiff British church-and-state
conservative. These early effusions of Hugo are noble pieces of
versification, and wonderful enough as the works of a very young man;
but they cannot be called poetry of a high order, nor do they even
give promise of what he was to do later, except that towards the last
we begin to find poems which bid us expect great things in the way of
style.

Two years afterward, in 1828, appeared a second volume of poems,
"Les Orientales", a collection of dream-pictures of Eastern life, in
somewhat the same manner as the efforts of Thomas Moore which were
popular with young ladies of the last generation, but infinitely
superior to all the "Lalla Rookhs" and other impossibilities of that
little Irish dandy. The fact is that some of Hugo's most beautiful
lyrics are to be found in this collection, and certainly some of his
greatest successes in passionate, highly-colored description. He was a
man whose heart grew slowly, however, and we look in vain as yet
for poems which could teach us much about life and how to bear it
patiently or enjoy it nobly.

But we are now in the midst of the four years during which Victor Hugo
was changing his attitude towards art entirely, 1826-1830. Up to this
time he had not entered specially into the business of criticism,
had not made theories about writing, but simply written, either
celebrating his political heroes or letting his fancy wander through
distant lands, which were full of glamour because distant. He had
gathered about him a circle of interesting people; indeed he was
already the young king of nearly all the rising literary men and
women in Paris. It was natural that there should be a great deal of
discussion among them about the rules and proprieties of their art;
but Victor Hugo was still, in this matter as in every other, a
conservative.

In 1827 he surprised this little world of admirers with a drama,
"Cromwell", in the preface to which he expounded some advanced views
in regard to dramatic writing. His opinions were debated, and all
Paris was divided into their supporters and opponents. In 1830
appeared "Hernani", which he succeeded in having played at the Theatre
francais, in spite of the opposition of the Academy, which saw in it a
menace to good literature.

There are few exciting events in the history of literature. It is in
the main a record of quiet, intellectual lives, a story of thoughts
and tendencies. The account of a single border feud will present a
greater number of striking incidents than the history of the forces
which have produced our English poetry or Germany's philosophy.
And the few memorable anecdotes of a concrete character which are
scattered here and there in the chronicles of literature usually
attract more attention than they deserve. They are suitable chiefly
to awaken the interest of children and ignorant people. Out of ten
persons who will tell you that Demosthenes practised oratory by the
sea-shore, with a pebble in his mouth, not more than one has any
notion what his orations themselves were about. The man who is most
set agog by the story of Shakespeare's poaching exploit is the least
likely to have read his plays. The same thing might be said of the
hubbub occasioned by the first representation of Victor Hugo's
"Hernani", on February 25, 1830. There is a temptation to make
"Hernani" the text of disquisitions on Romanticism, forgetting that it
is a drama of high intrinsic merit, and that the question of positive
value is, after all, the essential one.

Word was passed about among those who regarded Hugo's new theories
with aversion, and a large and mainly hostile audience was assembled
on that memorable night, the most eventful _premiere_ since the first
representation of Corneille's "Cid", nearly two hundred years before.
Everybody knows what happened. Everybody knows how fashion and
aristocracy and journalism combined to kill the new piece, which was
said to have been written in defiance of the rules followed by Racine
and Voltaire; how the regular theatre-goers hissed, and were howled
at in turn by the worshippers of novelty, frowsy, long-haired young
artists and penny-a-liners and students, from the left bank of the
Seine, who had been brought over to support the play. One of the most
sacred institutions of the French theatre is the _claque_, or body of
hired applauders. Now on this occasion there was no _claque_, for
the friends of Victor Hugo had distributed free tickets in the Latin
Quarter, and their recipients were present, ready to raise the roof if
necessary. The hissing and hooting began almost with the first line,
and continued for several hours, until the actors had mouthed through
the whole tragedy; and yet it was considered that "Hernani" had won
the day.

To us such a way of supporting the fine arts and defending the canons
of literary taste, indeed even such widespread and frenzied interest
in anything except business, sport, politics, and religion, seems, to
say the least, remarkable. But we must remember that the French go to
the theatre even more than we go to church; that in February 1830 it
was not safe to get excited about politics in Paris; that athletics
were neglected in France previous to 1871; and that possibly the
French might disagree with us in our estimation of business as the
chief end of man. But although I admire the French for this fine
capability of theirs,--this capability of taking an excited interest
in the things of the mind, I cannot help thinking that the critics and
historians have made too much of that fracas on the 25th of February,
1830, in the Theatre francais. They tell us that this was the first
great fight between the Romanticists and the Classicists.

We can learn what these words mean only by getting the critics to
indicate to us a piece of art-work constructed according to the
Romanticists and another constructed according to the Classicists, and
then comparing them and picking out the essential differences.
They say "Hernani" is a drama of the Romanticists, and that
seventeenth-century tragedy was classical. We find, indeed, that
Victor Hugo's drama differs from Racine's; "Hernani" is based upon
life in Spain, and not in Greece or Rome, and the period is the
sixteenth century, and not the age of Pericles or Tiberius Caesar.
But if this is all, then Corneille was a Romanticist, for his first
successful tragedy, the "Cid", is also a drama of Spanish life, and
is set, moreover, in the Middle Ages. But, they say, this is not all:
"Hernani" is romantic because it contains a mingling of the comic and
the heroic, inasmuch as there are in it words and notions of common
use, where the author might have employed expressions and ideas
consecrated and set apart wholly to the service of poetry.

And this is true. Victor Hugo does use both phrases and thoughts that
no writer of French tragedy had dared to use before. And here, rather
than anywhere else, do we find what we mean when we say he was a
Romanticist. I have heard one definition of the term as applied to
French literature, which said that the essence of Classicism was the
seeking of material in the life of Greece and Rome, and that the
essence of Romanticism was the seeking of material in the life of the
Middle Ages. The true definition, I think, however, is this, if any be
possible: Classicism in literature consists in limiting the choice of
a writer within a certain range of special terms and special ideas,
these terms and these ideas being such as the best authors of the
past have considered beautiful and appropriate. Romanticism is the
theory--a more generous one--which would permit and encourage a writer
to look for his material and his terms among thoughts and expressions
more common in everyday experience, with large freedom of choice. As
a matter of fact, the poet who is no longer bound by the examples
of Racine and Voltaire will naturally turn to the Middle Ages for
inspiration and material, because Racine and Voltaire have nearly
exhausted the resources of Greece and Rome.

It would be foolish to take pride in the discovery, for so much has
been written on this subject that surely some one has expressed my
idea long ago; but I do think that the whole question of Classicism,
and the thing itself, sprang almost entirely from Racine. At any rate
they are purely French in origin. The old stupid German Classicism
which Lessing demolished, the eighteenth-century English Classicism
which Scott and Wordsworth demolished, both had their source in
France. And in France Racine ruled supreme. He built his tragedies
after a severe pattern, and made them very beautiful, but wholly
artificial. People liked them, in that stiff and conventional age,
and were far enough from investigating whether they and the dramas of
Sophocles and Seneca were in truth built on the same plan. They took
that for granted. Henceforth to their minds there was only one way
of making a tragedy: it must not violate the three unities, of time,
place, and action; it must deal exclusively with exalted, heroic, and
terrible emotions; it must contain only poetical expressions; it must
be composed in Alexandrine couplets, with certain minor points of
agreement with the versification of Racine. In short, a writer of
tragedy must think like Racine and rhyme like Racine, and, above all,
he must never under any circumstances employ a term or indicate an
action which might be called vulgar. From France the fashion spread
all over Europe. It affected Italy, even down to Alfieri, who at the
end of the last century was hampered by this spirit of obedience to
Racine. It made English literature of the eighteenth century what it
was, and kept it from being what it might have been. Her acceptance of
this theory was one of the reasons why Germany had no literature of
great account from the time of Luther and Hans Sachs to the day of
brave old Lessing, who was the first man of consequence to see what
was the matter, and to set to work remedying it by destructive
criticism and constructive example. If it is the glory of Germany that
her Lessing was the sharpest-eyed man in Europe and the first person
sound enough, independent enough, blunt enough, and skilful enough
to change the fashion; to us of English speech belongs the pride of
saying that it was back to Shakespeare's large humanity that the
reformers turned. For Shakespeare is the great Romanticist. It was in
Shakespeare that Lessing, Goethe, and Schiller, and the later German
Romanticists, whether as critics or translators or poets, studied
literary art. The Germans Tieck and Schlegel and Herder and von Arnim,
justly celebrated as students of mediaeval literature and as original
producers, were pre-eminently Shakespearean scholars. And now the
French make a great stir of self-gratulation when, as late as 1830,
one of their own poets falls into line and discovers that Shakespeare,
and not Racine, had defined the true boundaries of the tragedian's
art.

Racine tolerated no mingling of the comic and the tragic, as if
laughter never followed tears. Shakespeare constantly mingles them.
Racine would have been horrified at the thought of descending
occasionally to prose, or introducing real songs (the choruses in
"Esther" are hardly of that character) in tragedy. Shakespeare, better
acquainted with this mad, sweet, awful world of ours, is no more
afraid of sudden contrasts than Nature is herself. Racine could never
have brought himself to say "handkerchief" in a tragedy. Shakespeare
does not say that Othello demands of Desdemona a quadrangular tissue
of snowiest cambric, but comes plump out with the word, and it wrecked
Alfred de Vigny's French translation of "Othello" when it was first
performed in Paris, in 1829, and the actor uttered the unhappy word
_mouchoir_.

I do not mean to imply that Victor Hugo would not have emancipated
himself from the thraldom of Racine had he never read our Shakespeare.
He would doubtless have felt cramped, and have sought room for
expansion. He would doubtless have done what he did do, in one
respect, and that is, have turned to mediaeval and later European
history for the inspiration of novels such as "Notre Dame de Paris",
of plays like "Hernani" and "Ruy Blas", and of a number of his lyrics.
The Germans had already set him an example in the matter of utilizing
folklore and the mediaeval epics and mediaeval history. The brothers
Grimm, those quiet, indefatigable giants, had opened up in Germany a
wonderful mine, not only for philological research, but of poetical
inspiration. Since the days when Goethe helped himself so nobly in the
old German storehouse, drawing thence his best dramatic product,
from "Goetz von Berlichingen" to "Faust"; and Schiller even more
abundantly,--since the days of these great men no German poet except
Richard Wagner has availed himself of these riches to make a really
great art-work, such as Tennyson has done with the Arthurian romances
and William Morris with the Norse sagas.

We have seen that the conservative reaction, represented by
Chateaubriand, Lamartine, Lamennais, and Hugo, lasted from 1815 to
1830, and that the new spirit, of Romanticism, which had been working
all along, finally became dominant then. The political revolution of
1830, often called the Revolution of July, had dethroned Charles X,
and brought in, with a more liberal constitution, Louis Philippe,
a prince of the house of Orleans. This event proved to be a great
stimulus to literary activity and a guarantee of literary freedom. It
went far towards destroying the expectation of reviving a state of
society and a tone of thought modelled after seventeenth-century life.
It weakened the monarchical tendency altogether, for it divided the
hopes of conservatives and proved that the Bourbons were not the only
possible kings of France, but that many monarchists would take a king
wherever they could get him. As is usual, and not in politics merely,
but in all combinations of human effort where supremacy must be
maintained by compromise, the unsuccessful minority, the hungry
opposition, was freer from division, more single in aim, and purer in
method, than the party in power. There is sometimes no party tonic
like defeat, and nothing is so recuperative as retirement for a
season. So then after fifteen years of invigorating rest, the
republican party was more capable in 1830 than in 1815 of inspiring
the enthusiasm of men who desired well for their country. It had been
so far purified that a young poet like Hugo might be attracted towards
it as to the saving remnant of his people. His drift in the direction
of republicanism was hastened by the fact that his next two dramas,
"Marion De Lorme", 1831, and "Le Roi s'amuse", 1832, were kept from
being performed by ministerial order, because they displayed two
revered kings of France, Louis XIII and Francis I as the shallow,
pleasure-loving men they were.

A new era for French literature began in 1830. We are justified in
saying this, because the great names of the former decade had lost
their brilliancy, and another set of writers began to be celebrated
and to be looked upon as establishing the tone of thought. The
character of the product, too, is different. There was a larger
freedom in the choice and treatment of subjects, the literatures of
England and Germany were being studied and translated. For the first
time, also, was there in France any widespread appreciation of Dante.
The fact I wish to establish is merely that the spirit had completely
changed, and no argument beyond the evidence of our senses is
necessary.

Pursuing still our old method of investigation, if we want to know
what the new spirit was, we must first inquire who were the prominent
men that breathed it, and then possibly attempt a definition. As
Chateaubriand, Lamartine, and Lamennais set the tone in 1815, so Hugo
with his friends and others of the same free spirit did in 1830. About
this powerful, enthusiastic man and his cultivated young wife, in
their simple home, there gathered a number of literary men and women,
who were called the _cenacle_ or symposium. They, with other persons
whom their influence touched, had a common tendency, which in the case
of some was clearly enough defined to be called a common conscious
purpose. The German poet Heine was living in Paris at that time, and
we know very well what object he set before his eyes. Matthew Arnold,
in his fine essay on Heinrich Heine, quotes the great singer's own
words, and makes them the text of an illuminating criticism. They
represent exactly the sentiment of Hugo and his friends at that time.
Hear them: "I know not if I deserve that a laurel-wreath should one
day be laid on my coffin. Poetry, dearly as I have loved it, has
always been to me but a divine plaything. I have never attached any
great value to poetical fame; and I trouble myself very little whether
people praise my verses or blame them. But lay on my coffin a _sword_:
for I was a brave soldier in the war of liberation of humanity."

If you have read any of the so-called _comedies et proverbes_ of
Alfred de Musset, as "Fantasio" and "On ne badine pas avec l'amour",
you must have felt how those short recitals of passion are breathed
through and through with the spirit of revolt against conventional
opinion; how high they stand above whatever is commonplace; how little
they derive their pulsating interest from what is usual and accepted.
You know how it is when you listen to an orator who employs false
methods of exciting the emotions: how he drops his voice at the end of
certain phrases; how he whines through certain cadences; how he tries
his battery of anecdotes; how he grows warm at the conclusion, and
sits down amid a hush and thrill, very likely, leaving in shallow
minds the impression that he has made an effective appeal. Yet to the
discriminating listener it is instantly apparent that he has been
merely following the conventional method, and very possibly has not
meant a word of what he said; and when a simpler, freer man gets
up and talks sensibly and calmly you see wherein the vice of
conventionality lies. It is in deceiving the performer himself and
corrupting his power to judge himself or form a critical estimate of
what he is doing. The result is that he fails to observe that he is
doing nothing original. And so he goes on feeding us with husks of
commonplace. Now, every generation demands, and would, if it were
untrammelled by convention, produce, its own interpretation of the
phenomena of life. The radicals of our fathers' time are conservatives
for us, and we ourselves, however vigorous our protest against present
oppressions, shall in our old age be considered so much detritus,
to be got rid of by the hot young builders of that day. So the
Romanticists of 1830, being soldiers in the war of liberation of
humanity, were the deadly enemies of what is commonplace, of what is
conventional; were radicals in politics, in religion, and in their
aesthetics. One of the most interesting subjects for historical
investigation is the development of aesthetic theories. And of all
periods when art theories have undergone great changes, this period of
1830 in France is one of the most interesting.

They hoped, these brilliant enthusiasts, to bring about a new French
Revolution, bloodless, of the spirit rather than of the form. Here are
their names: Lamartine (for he had gone over to the Romanticists),
Victor Hugo, Alfred de Musset, Beranger, Alfred de Vigny, Balzac,
George Sand, Alexandre Dumas, Sainte-Beuve. You perceive that although
the original revolt was against the dramatic fetters imposed by Racine
and Boileau and Voltaire, the revolution had extended over the whole
range of literature--against conventionality in criticism, in lyric
poetry, in fiction; just as the revolt of the American colonies soon
got far beyond the original grievance about the tax on tea. Their
common tendency was protest against conventionality. They went too far
under this impulse. Alfred de Musset, for instance, translated liberty
into libertinism, and marred the innocent bloom of his art by the
licentiousness of his life. Victor Hugo, the devout, God-fearing
youth, became a sentimentalist and skeptic; a poet could not do worse,
and the effect is seen in a marked diminution of creative force. He no
longer possessed his old earnestness, and thus his work of this period
fails to touch our hearts with fire. The self-consciousness of youth,
instead of melting into that ever-present recognition of the Divine
which is the true culture of a mature man, only stiffened into an
odious self-conceit, which is Victor Hugo's ugliest blemish. George
Sand advocated and practised free-love. Beranger, the Robert Burns
of France (but not nearly so great a poet), overdid his office of
convivial songster, and one pities him and dreads the effect of his
influence. Dumas' private life was a long scandal, saved from ignominy
only by the contrast between its ludicrousness and his genius. His
lack of restraint affected his work too, for had he possessed more
restraint he would have written fewer books, and they might all have
been as good as "Les Trois Mousquetaires".

Alfred de Vigny is a beautiful exception. Although he followed Victor
Hugo with all the ardor of his chivalrous nature, he preserved at the
same time a measure, a moderation, a grace, a consistency, which the
coldest Classicist might have envied. He was born in 1799, of a family
of soldiers, and tells us he learned war at the wounded knees of his
warrior father. In his early life he was constantly laying down the
pen for the sword. While in garrison at Paris he was to be found
chiefly in the libraries, and it was in camp, in the Pyrenees, that
he wrote his celebrated historical novel, "Cinq Mars". I have already
mentioned his fine translation of "Othello", which met with such
strange and undeserved disaster in 1829. He cultivated English
literature assiduously, and drew inspiration from Milton--and Ossian.
The rhapsodies of the pseudo-Ossian were causing a great stir
throughout Europe, and were eagerly read and applied by the
Romanticists as a proof of what could be done in defiance of the rules
of Boileau. Alfred de Vigny, too, like almost every novelist from that
day to this, was profoundly influenced by Walter Scott. He fortified
his position with several other plays, of which the best known is
"Chatterton". But the works from his hand which our generation reads
most are "Cinq Mars" and his lyric poems.

Alfred de Musset was a poet of such great importance that it is
impossible to say, in a brief sketch like this, anything at all
adequate about his delicate qualities of heart and mind, his strange,
sad life, his wonderful achievements, and his growing fame. He will
live perhaps when all his contemporaries are forgotten, except Hugo.
Hugo himself has no other rival so dangerous.

Of Balzac, George Sand, and Dumas it is hardly necessary to speak in
this connection: being novelists, they have the advantage of being
read--which is not always the case with poets. The development of the
novel has been the only concerted movement of great importance in
French literature since the early days of Romanticism. From Balzac,
the father of the realists, Hugo, the extreme of idealists, learned
little. There seems to be absolutely no artistic relation between
them. George Sand and Dumas were, of course, idealists, romantic to
the last degree, and although Hugo in his novels manifestly strains
after reality, he is much more in line with them than with Balzac. But
Hugo is not a novelist at all in the sense that Balzac or George
Sand or Dumas are novelists. He has written certain prose works of
imagination, entitled "Les Miserables", "Les Travailleurs de la Mer",
"Notre Dame de Paris", and so forth, but the matter in each case is
essentially poetical, and it seems to me that the language is neither
that of prose nor that of verse.

There remains one other member of the _cenacle_ who is not so well
known that mention of him here would seem superfluous, and who yet
had much influence over Hugo. Sainte-Beuve (1804-1869) was one of the
greatest literary critics the world has known--perhaps the greatest.
At the age of twenty-four he published his "Tableau historique et
critique de la poesie francaise et du theatre francais au seizieme
siecle", a work of deep maturity, showing a marvellous grasp of fact
and a spirit of rare discrimination. Some men seem born with literary
taste. There are boys of ten who appreciate poetry better than most
educated men of forty, and can tell you the reasons, more or less
correctly, for their opinions. The end and aim of all literary
education should be to create and foster this faculty of apprehension
and discrimination. Some come by it naturally. For others it can only
be the result of large and varied reading and considerable experience
in affairs, and of a culture of the heart. To Sainte-Beuve it was
given in abundant measure at an early age, and he strengthened it by
assiduous labor. No other language can boast a body of criticism at
all comparable with his "Causeries du Lundi" and "Nouveaux Lundis". In
English we prize jealously, as things unparalleled in our language and
precious beyond expression for their rare beauty and usefulness,
the literary criticisms of Matthew Arnold. Imagine a Matthew Arnold
without prejudices, without hobbies, without mannerisms, who should
give us a complete body of criticism covering the whole range of
English literature, not merely discussing and estimating and comparing
authors, but telling us the contents of their writings! This is
Sainte-Beuve's secret. He makes us see the man he is talking about,
he makes us know and appreciate his productions, and then, with a few
brief, luminous suggestions, leaves the whole matter to settle
itself properly in our minds. Sainte-Beuve also wrote poetry of no
inconsiderable merit, but passes this severe condemnation upon all
the poetry of himself and his friends, at this epoch, saying: "Il
est resulte de ce concours de talent, pendant plusieurs saisons,
une tres-riche poesie lyrique, plus riche que la France n'en avait
soupconne jusqu'alors, mais une poesie tres-inegale et tres-melee. La
plupart des poetes se sont livres, sans controle et sans frein, a tous
les instincts de leur nature, et aussi a toutes les pretentions de
leur orgueil, ou meme aux sottises de leur vanite. Les defauts et les
qualites sont sortis en toute licence, et la posterite aura a faire le
depart. Rien ne subsistera de complet des poetes de ce temps."

But Victor Hugo outlived all parties and groups and associations of
which he was a member in that early time, and his life subsequent to
the exciting days of 1830 was a steady development and contains in
itself a reflection of nearly everything that was going on in France.

We may consider him under three aspects: as dramatist, novelist, and
lyric poet. He is greatest under the last aspect. Through all his life
he expressed himself in song. Perhaps no other poet has done this so
thoroughly, so beautifully, and for so long a period. So I shall speak
of his personality and actual experiences when I come to consider his
lyric poetry, and shall first give an account of his work for the
stage and in prose fiction.

In 1827 appeared a so-called historical drama, "Cromwell", which was
not remarkable for much except its lack of historical truth, and its
preface, in which the young man outlined his theories and laid down
the programme of attack upon the classical ideas. This attack was in
reality first made with "Hernani" in 1830. "Marion De Lorme", which
appeared in 1831, is a much weaker play, and abounds in all the
excesses to which Romanticism was prone. Apart from the substance,
which is repulsive and harrowing, when not trivial and weak, the form
of the drama is loose, and one can very easily understand how such a
production would offend an ear trained to the stately, chaste, and
elegant dialogue of the elder poets. If this is all Romanticism has
to offer, let us have back our Corneille and Racine. "Le Roi s'amuse"
(1832) suffers from the same faults, and offends even more against
good taste. These pieces are both strong in the main, though there are
weak passages in both, but their strength is not healthy or beautiful.
Victor Hugo himself called attention to the fact that he depended for
his effect, in these two plays, upon the principle of contrast. It is
a principle which he has employed in nearly all his work, and which is
indeed one of the strongest elements of artistic effect, always and
everywhere, with all writers. Hugo, however, uses it too deliberately
and too exclusively. In "Le Roi s'amuse", for example, he has chosen
a most repulsive figure, Triboulet, whom lie makes hideous both
externally and internally, by every device known to art, and in this
character he implants a pure flower of paternal love. Then he stands
off and says: "Behold what I have done! How deformity looks black
behind that white virtue!" The principle is useful, but he makes a
forced application of it. In his novels, too, every reader will recall
instances where a contrast has been insisted upon till one's patience
is exhausted.

"Lucrece Borgia" (1833) illustrates the same point. It is a piling
of horror upon horror for the sake, apparently, of bringing into
sufficient relief a few passages of great moral beauty. This is as
undignified as it is useless. Virtue needs no such setting. M. Vinet
says that in this drama Hugo pandered to the false taste of the age,
which demanded horrors and violence and sensuous appeals, instead of
leading it, as he could, to follow better principles of taste.

"Marie Tudor" (1833) is, like "Cromwell", unhistorical. It is not one
of Hugo's greatest plays, nor is "Angelo" (1835), another drama,
in prose, founded on history; but "Ruy Blas" (1838) is generally
acknowledged to be, after "Hernani", the best of his dramas. It was
followed, in 1843, by "Les Burgraves", the last of his plays
written for the stage. My judgment may be too unenthusiastic, and
I acknowledge that only time can sift the true from the false, the
excellent from the second-rate; but I would not exchange the little
volume of Musset's unpretending "Comedies et Proverbes" for all the
"Hernanis" and "Ruy Blas" in the world, and that for the simple reason
that Musset is more sincere.

We have seen that at a very early age Victor Hugo wrote two stories,
"Bug Jargal" and "Han d'Islande". In 1831, while in the full heat of
his dramatic activity, he yet found time, by shutting himself up and
going out but once for six months, to write "Notre Dame de Paris",
which is one of his masterpieces of prose, an historical novel built
on a scale of gigantic proportions, and presupposing exhaustive
archaeological research. It is a vast picture, full of glaring lights
and awful shadows, of Paris in the Middle Ages, with the cathedral of
Notre Dame as background, and indeed as one of the characters.

A man who had produced so many strong plays and this remarkable novel,
not to mention his lyric poetry, could not longer be refused admission
into the national galaxy of great men, and in 1841 Hugo was elected
a member of the Academy. Two years later he was created a peer of
France. In spite of these anchors to conservatism, as one would
suppose them, a title of rank and a seat among the immortals, Hugo
became more and more radical in politics, drifting gradually
towards the conception of an ideal republic, and bending his course
thitherward. When Louis Bonaparte, not content with his election to
the presidency in 1848, overthrew the government, and proclaimed
himself Napoleon III, Emperor of the French, by the infamous _coup
d'etat_ of December 1851, there was no enemy more irreconcilable than
Victor Hugo. The brave poet was banished, and did not touch the soil
of France again till 1870, after Sedan, when the wicked Empire had
ignominiously dissolved. Although included in an amnesty, he had not
been willing to return until the Babylonian woe was past. Most of his
exile he spent on the island of Jersey, under the English flag. From
there he issued a political pamphlet, "Napoleon le Petit", and a
succession of volumes of poetry. His second great work of fiction,
"Les Miserables", appeared in 1862, followed by "Les Travailleurs de
la Mer", in 1866, and by "Quatre-vingt-treize", in 1874. "L'Homme qui
Rit", 1866, was an unsuccessful attempt at an historical novel, with
the scene in England. Of his novels "Les Miserables" is incomparably
the best. "Les Travailleurs de la Mer", while powerful in its unity
and intensity, is too full of technical terms and of idiosyncrasies
to be either easy or pleasant reading. "Notre Dame de Paris" and
"Quatre-vingt-treize" are the most popular, next to "Les Miserables".
In "Les Miserables" Hugo employed that short, choppy style which
has come to be known as Hugoesque. To many readers it is decidedly
wearisome, though by others it is considered the acme of nervous,
terse expression.

But it is as a lyric poet, I fancy, far more than as a dramatist, a
novelist, or a political pamphleteer, that Victor Hugo will be known,

    "When time has swept both friends and foes."

Unfortunately, foreign students of French literature are less likely
to seek acquaintance with his poems than with his plays and novels.
The peculiar character of French versification repels us. We,
accustomed to a more heavily accented line, cannot quickly sharpen our
ears to the delicate modulations we encounter there. But when once the
ear is attuned to these fainter harmonies, a wonderful revelation is
made to us in the long succession of songs that rose from the lips of
Victor Hugo; and I think it is safe to say that lie is at least the
greatest French lyric poet.

His poetry is so intimately the product of his life, that to
appreciate it we must know something more of that life, especially
the emotions and incidents connected with his home and family. His
marriage relation was one of perfect harmony, if one may judge of such
matters; and he was happy in his home. His wife was evidently the
companion of his thought. His children were two sons and a daughter.
In this daughter the poet's deepest love was centred, and her graces
are the theme of many of his loveliest songs, while her premature
death by drowning, with her young husband, in 1843, was the occasion
for that one of his lyrics which contains the fullest portion of moral
grandeur, "A Villequier". It is the heartbroken cry of a strong man
whom the hand of God has at last led back to faith and submission
along paths of darkest sorrow. For it must be remarked that Victor
Hugo, intoxicated with success and the atmosphere of protest which he
himself had done so much to create, had for many years apparently lost
sight of his young manhood's conviction of the immanence of a God
in the lives of men. After his daughter's death it was upon his
granddaughter Jeanne that his affection took root--the same Jeanne
whom he afterwards celebrated, throughout his old age, in the poems
which are found in the volume entitled "L'Art d'etre Grand-pere", and
who was the idol of the French nation. She was married a few years ago
to a son of Alphonse Daudet.

In the volumes of lyrics from 1822 to 1853, including "Odes et
Ballades", "Les Orientales", "Les Feuilles d'Automne", "Les Chants du
Crepuscule", and "Les Voix interieures", there is a marked change in
the views of the author as to religion and politics, from conservatism
to radicalism, from conviction to uncertainty and almost indifference;
and there seems to be a loss of energy when we compare the first with
the last productions, though there is a gain, of course, in technical
skill. But in all that time there was only an evolution, not a deep
moral change imposed from without, for the life of his heart was, all
those years, serene. But his exile broke this succession of tranquil
years and growing thoughts, and from 1852 to 1870, from "Les
Chatiments" to "L'Annee terrible", there runs through his volumes
a deep undertone of solicitude for the welfare of France, and more
especially of sad personal yearning to be back upon her soil. "L'Annee
terrible", the year of the invasion of France, the siege of Paris, and
the Commune, brought him back. The very day that Napoleon le Petit
followed his conquerors out of French territory, Victor Hugo entered,
and proceeding to Paris, threw himself passionately into the national
defence. It may seem a strange thing to say, but this year of disaster
must have been a grand and almost a joyous one in Hugo's life. It was
the vindication of his exile, in so far as that had been voluntary. It
gave him a chance, which he embraced, of translating his heroic words
into deeds. Any true man who had for years been writing about the
glory of his country and the sacred duty of maintaining her honor must
have felt a proud and awful joy in the opportunity to talk now with
deeds and words.

The rest of his life, from 1872 to 1885, was spent in conspicuous
eminence, on a throne of popularity where he sat the autocrat of
republican France, without a rival, and with scarce an enemy. It is
true that his career as an active politician was a failure, but then
it must have been soon apparent to him that he ought never to have
entered upon it, and that he could be more useful and incomparably
more distinguished in his own work. He died in Paris, on the 22d of
May, 1885. His funeral was a demonstration which has seldom been
equalled in the world's history for solemn pomp and the proud grief of
a nation.

The question of the man's personality need not enter into our estimate
of a dramatist, a novelist, or an historian, though as a matter of
fact it does. But we can hardly consider lyric poetry merely with
reference to its intrinsic quality. Lyric poetry is generally a record
of its author's most intimate emotions; it is a sublimation of his
life: and this is peculiarly true in the case of Victor Hugo. For,
after all, his chief subject was himself. It is certainly permissible,
and we can readily understand that it is indeed almost necessary, that
a lyric poet should view the world subjectively. One can therefore
find no fault with Victor Hugo for this. But it is a marked
characteristic of his work that he cannot get outside of himself, that
he is rarely carried away by his passion for the beautiful and the
true, though this passion he did really possess. So although we cannot
blame his egoism as a fault, we must deplore it as a defect; for on
account of it alone he falls short, in the opinion of many critics, of
being a great world-poet, one of the supreme consolers and sustainers
of humanity.

There is a fine essay on Victor Hugo by Mr. Frederic W. H. Myers,
[note:In volume v of _The Nineteenth Century_.] which all students of
the poet ought to read, not only because it is a very thorough criticism
on Hugo as a lyric poet, but also because it is a masterly piece of work
altogether, and full of suggestions. Mr. Myers says: "In his moral nature
we shall find much that is strong, elevated, and tender; a true passion
for France, a true sympathy for the poor and the oppressed, a true
fondness for children. Further than this it will be hard to go; so plain
will it be that the egoism which penetrates M. Hugo's character is a bar
to all higher sublimity, and has exercised a disastrous effect on his
intellectual as well as on his moral character.

"In calling M. Hugo egoistic I am far from accusing him of vulgar
self-seeking--of an undue regard for any tangible form of personal
advantage. What I mean is that he seems never to forget himself; that
whatever truth he is pursuing, whatever scene he describes, his own
attitude in regard to it is never absent from his mind. And hence it
results that all other objects are unconsciously made secondary to the
great object of making an impression of the kind desired. From the
smallest details of style up to the most serious steps in political
conduct this preoccupation is visible. It was the same spirit which
prompted the poet to begin one of his most solemn elegiac poems with
the repeated assertion "that it should never be said that _he_ kept
silence, that _he_ did not send a sombre strophe to sit before his
children's tomb", and which prompted the politician to resign in
a moment the trust which Paris had committed to him, because the
Assembly would not listen to him with the respect which he thought his
due."

Mr. Myers seems too sparing of his praise for what Hugo did that is
excellent in poetry, passing without mention some of his sweetest
songs and most stirring outbursts of grandeur. His essay came as
antidote to the immoderate eulogy published just before by Mr.
Swinburne, and overdoes its promise of giving us a calmer estimate of
Hugo. Mr. Myers does not do justice to the contents of Hugo's poetry,
and he is perhaps not as susceptible of being ravished by the form as
Swinburne was. Yet there is truth in what Mr. Myers says when he tells
us that he thinks Hugo's "central distinction lies in his unique power
over the French language, greatly resembling Mr. Swinburne's power
over the English language, and manifesting itself chiefly in beauty
and inventiveness of poetical form and melody." Mr. Edward Dowden
speaks with high praise of Hugo's successful efforts "to reform the
rhythm of French verse, to enrich its rhymes, to give mobility to the
caesura, to carry the sense beyond the couplet, to substitute definite
and picturesque words in place of the _fadeurs_ of classical mythology
and vague poetical periphrasis." And this is indeed Hugo's chief
distinction and the chief distinction of all the Romanticists, for
their pretended searching of foreign literature and mediaeval history
brought them less poetical material than variety and vigor of poetical
form.

The two most characteristic classes of subjects of Victor Hugo's poems
are politics, in a wide sense of the word, and his own family life.
He is not a great poet of nature, though some of his sea-pictures are
very remarkable. He was prevented by his egoism from being a great
interpreter of the heart or a great preacher of divine truth. But Mr.
Myers, with much reason apparently, finds a fundamental weakness in
Hugo's early political poetry also. He tells, and proves it too, that
Hugo had not fully made up his mind, prior to his banishment, what his
political ideal was. He sang the praises of the Bourbons when they
were on the throne; but then he was a mere boy, and I have shown how
at that time he was under the potent influence of the period, which
made for conservatism. That surely is a part of his history of which
he has no reason to be ashamed, even though he soon emancipated
himself from royalist tendencies. But what is harder to understand,
for a foreigner, is how he could have become a worshipper of Napoleon
and a friend of Louis Bonaparte. It is only the French who could thus
kiss the hand that smote them, and love a tyrant because he brought
them false glory--the glory of victory in unjust wars. Patriotism of
that sort is a national vice, and the French have it in their blood.
We might suppose that when he had not only got rid of his Bourbon
blindness, but recovered from his Napoleonic fever, Victor Hugo
would at last find favor in Mr. Myers's eyes, as a republican, and a
republican who suffered eighteen years of exile for his opinions. But
no; Mr. Myers's praise is strictly qualified, and again he convinces
us that he is right: "We find the same vagueness and emptiness in M.
Hugo's praises of the Republic, and yet there is no subject on which a
political preacher in France needs to be more explicit. For under the
name of Republic are included two forms of government as dissimilar as
forms of government can be. A republic may be constructed, like the
American republic, on individualistic principles, reducing the action
of government to a minimum, and leaving every one undisturbed in the
pursuit of private well-being. Or it may be constructed on socialistic
principles", etc. And he goes on to say that "no real instruction on
these points can be got from M. Hugo's writings or speeches."

Mr. Myers carries his condemnation even into the sphere of
love-poetry, declaring that Hugo did not write the very best
love-poetry because his love was always a refined egoism, and that his
poetry suffers from "the want which separates patronage and desire
from chivalry and passion."

I have purposely quoted some of the severest things I could find
in first-class criticism, because I wish to conclude with words of
praise, which will carry more weight if it is perceived that they were
not blindly penned. It is in itself a great achievement to have done
so much honest work of a high character as Hugo did. It is no small
distinction to have guided a people's hopes for eighteen years from
his island of exile. It is a noble end of a zealous life to have worn
for fifteen years the crown of such a nation's kingship. But when even
these proud honors are forgotten, children's voices will still repeat
and men's hearts still echo a hundred songs of the greatest lyric poet
of France.






HISTORICAL NOTE TO "HERNANI".


"HERNANI" is an historical tragedy. Its real hero is that inscrutable
great man upon whom fortune bestowed first the throne of Spain and
presently the crown of the Holy Roman Empire, with the title Charles
the Fifth. Although Hugo, as a dramatist may do with perfect right,
departs in many instances from historical fact, the play demands for
its proper enjoyment some information concerning the nature of the
imperial office and the character of Charles.

An earlier and mightier Charles, king of the German conquerors of
Gaul, was by Pope Leo III, on Christmas Day, A.D. 800, crowned in the
basilica of St. Peter head of the Roman Empire, which was believed to
be still, with unimpaired authority, the same as that of Augustus.
From its connection with the Church as the temporal complement of the
spiritual reign of Christ's vicar, the Empire was thenceforth most
frequently denominated the Holy Roman Empire. Its vitality was never
greater than under Charlemagne himself. Its limits, both in the minds
of men and on the map of Europe, were at no time during the next
seven hundred years really greater than in his reign. In general the
Emperors claimed dominion over Italy, Germany, the Low Countries, and
much of what is now the Austrian Empire, Switzerland, and France,
besides the precedence over all other kings and potentates. They
desired to be considered, and by most men were considered, to be in
temporal things the counterpart of the Popes in things spiritual, and
with jurisdiction no less widespread. It was traditional that the king
chosen by the seven great princes, or electors, of Germany, should
proceed to Rome, there to be crowned Emperor by the Pope. With not a
few exceptions these honors were confined for long periods of time to
certain families. The first member of the house of Hapsburg who won
the election was Rudolf (1272-1292), founder of the present Austrian
dynasty. Another Hapsburger, Albert I, was chosen in 1298, and
another, Albert II, in 1438; since when, until the annihilation of the
Holy Roman Empire in 1806, all the Emperors, with two exceptions, have
been of that house.

None of his successors made such an impression upon the imagination
of contemporary and following generations as was produced by
the stupendous figure of Charles the Great. His reputation was
well-earned. He can be called, better than any other man, the creator
of mediaeval Europe. In his day looked upon as a Roman, the French
have adopted him as the father of their nationality, and he is the
hero of their ancient epic poetry. Yet, as Mr. Bryce declares, he was
entirely German: "No claim can be more groundless than that which the
modern French, the sons of the Latinized Kelts, set up to the Teutonic
Charles. At Rome he might assume the chlamys and the sandals (marks of
a Roman patrician), but at the head of his Frankish host he strictly
adhered to the customs of his country, and was beloved by his people
as the very ideal of their own character and habits. Of strength
and stature almost superhuman, in swimming and hunting unsurpassed,
steadfast and terrible in fight, to his friends gentle and
condescending, he was a Roman, much less a Gaul, in nothing but his
culture and his schemes of government, otherwise a Teuton. The centre
of his realm was the Rhine; his capitals Aachen and Engilenheim; his
army Frankish; his sympathies--as they are shown in the gathering of
the old hero-lays, the composition of a German grammar, the ordinance
against confining prayer to the three languages, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin--were all for the race from which he sprang, and whose advance,
represented by the victory of Austrasia, the true Frankish fatherland,
over Neustria and Aquitaine, spread a second Germanic wave over the
conquered countries." (Bryce: "Holy Roman Empire", pp. 71 and 72.)

It is a long jump from the crowning of Charles the Great, in A.D. 800,
to the accession of Maximilian I, of the house of Hapsburg, in 1493.
The imperial dignity, as such, had declined. The power of Maximilian
lay in his hereditary possession of the grandduchy of Austria and
his acquisition, by marriage, of the Burgundian lands, including
Franche-Comte, Luxemburg, Flanders, Holland, Zeeland, Brabant, and
Limburg; in other words, a territory which embraced what is now
Belgium, Dauphiny, Burgundy, and parts of Holland, of Provence, of
Languedoc, and of Savoy. Philip, son of this Maximilian, married
Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella. Ferdinand, head of the
united kingdoms of Aragon and Leon, and Isabella, Queen of Castile,
had by their marriage, in 1469, consolidated Spain into a strong
kingdom. Through their success in promoting industry and conquering
the Moors of Granada, and by the discovery of America, Spain rose to
a dominant position in European politics. Joanna became hopelessly
insane. Philip, for two years King of Castile, after the death of
Isabella in 1504, died in 1506. Charles, son of Philip and Joanna, was
born at Ghent in 1500. From his maternal grandparents he inherited
Aragon (with Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia) and Castile (with the
American colonies). He had been brought up at his father's court in
Brussels, and was not really Spanish in sympathies or culture. On
the death of his grandfather, Ferdinand the Catholic, in 1516, the
Cardinal Ximenes protected his interests until his arrival in Spain,
in 1517. The beginnings of his career as Charles I. of Spain were
weak. His mother, though shut up in a madhouse, was nominally joint
ruler with him, and his Spanish subjects took advantage of this fact
to oppose him and his Flemish favorites.

He unjustly and ungratefully degraded Ximenes, and showed little
indication of tact and small sense of responsibility. In 1519, on the
death of his grandfather Maximilian, Charles became Grand Duke of
Austria, inheriting from him also Burgundy, which had come into the
family with his grandmother, Mary of Burgundy. He immediately set up
his candidacy for election as German King. His opponents were Henry
VIII of England and Francis I of France, the latter a real and
formidable rival.

The electors were the Archbishops of Trier (Treves), Mainz, and
Cologne, the Duke of Saxony, the Count Palatine, the King of Bohemia,
and the Margrave of Brandenburg. The constitution of the electoral
body had been settled in 1356 by an instrument called the Golden
Bull, issued by the Emperor Charles IV and confirmed at the Diet of
Nuremberg: By it Frankfort was made the place of election, and the
Archbishop of Mainz convener of the college.

In June 1519 this body was convoked at Frankfort, and after hearing
the claims of Francis and Charles, offered the imperial crown to one
of their own number, the Elector of Saxony, Frederick the Wise. He
declined it in favor of Charles, who was then elected. It took nine
days for the news to travel to Barcelona, where the young man was.
Naturally elated at his success he assumed, even in his decrees as
King of Spain, the title of Majesty, which up to that time no mere
king had received; disregarded the appeals of his Spanish subjects
to remain in that country; and hastened to Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle),
where he was crowned German King in October 1520.

After ten years of political and military activity, contests with
Luther and his adherents, wars with Francis I, who laid claim to
Burgundy and Northern Italy, Charles was crowned Emperor, at Bologna,
in 1530. From then until 1555 he filled Europe with the blaze of his
achievements, reviving the almost vanished prestige of the imperial
office. In 1555 he abdicated his throne and retired to the monastery
of San Yuste, near Plasencia, where, in 1558, he died.


[Transcriber's note: notes with numbertags are to be found at the end
of the text, those with lettertags are placed immediately after the
part they refer to.]


PREFACE DE L'AUTEUR.


L'auteur de ce drame ecrivait il y a peu de semaines a propos d'un
poete mort[1] avant l'age:

"...Dans ce moment de melee et de tourmente litteraire, qui faut-il
plaindre, ceux qui meurent ou ceux qui combattent? Sans doute, il est
triste de voir un poete de vingt ans qui s'en va, une lyre qui se
brise, un avenir qui s'evanouit; mais n'est-ce pas quelque chose aussi
que le repos? N'est-il pas permis a ceux autour desquels s'amassent
incessamment calomnies, injures, haines, jalousies, sourdes menees,
basses trahisons; hommes loyaux auxquels on fait une guerre deloyale;
hommes devoues qui ne voudraient enfin que doter le pays d'une liberte
de plus, celle de l'art, celle de l'intelligence; hommes laborieux qui
poursuivent paisiblement leur oeuvre de conscience, en proie d'un
cote a de viles machinations de censure[2] et de police, en butte de
l'autre, trop souvent, a l'ingratitude des esprits memes pour lesquels
ils travaillent; ne leur est-il pas permis de retourner quelquefois la
tete avec envie vers ceux qui sont tombes derriere eux et qui dorment
dans le tombeau? _Invideo_, disait Luther dans le cimetiere de Worms,
_invideo, quia quiescunt_.

"Qu'importe toutefois? Jeunes gens, ayons bon courage! Si rude qu'on
nous veuille faire le present, l'avenir sera beau. Le romantisme, tant
de fois mal defini, n'est, a tout prendre, et c'est la sa definition
reelle, si l'on ne l'envisage que sous son cote militant, que le
_liberalisme_ en litterature. Cette verite est deja comprise a peu
pres de tous les bons esprits, et le nombre en est grand; et bientot,
car l'oeuvre est deja bien avancee, le liberalisme litteraire ne sera
pas moins populaire que le liberalisme politique. La liberte dans
l'art, la liberte dans la societe, voila le double but auquel doivent
tendre d'un meme pas tous les esprits consequents et logiques; voila
la double banniere qui rallie, a bien peu d'intelligences pres
(lesquelles s'eclaireront), toute la jeunesse si forte et si patiente
d'aujourd'hui; puis, avec la jeunesse et a sa tete, l'elite de la
generation qui nous a precedes, tous ces sages vieillards qui, apres
le premier moment de defiance et d'examen, ont reconnu que ce que font
leur fils est une consequence de ce qu'ils ont fait eux-memes, et que
la liberte litteraire est fille de la liberte politique. Ce principe
est celui du siecle, et prevaudra. Les _Ultras_ de tout genre,
classiques ou monarchiques, auront beau se preter secours pour refaire
l'ancien regime de toutes pieces, societe et litterature; chaque
progres du pays, chaque developpement des intelligences, chaque pas
de la liberte fera crouler tout ce qu'ils auront echafaude. Et,
en definitive, leurs efforts de reaction auront ete utiles. En
revolution, tout mouvement fait avancer. La verite et la liberte ont
cela d'excellent que tout ce qu'on fait pour elles et tout ce qu'on
fait contre elles les sert egalement. Or, apres tant de grandes choses
que nos peres ont faites et que nous avons vues, nous voila sortis de
la vieille forme sociale; comment ne sortirions-nous pas de la vieille
forme poetique? A peuple nouveau, art nouveau. Tout en admirant la
litterature de Louis XIV, si bien adaptee a sa monarchie, elle saura
bien avoir sa litterature propre et personnelle et nationale, cette
France actuelle, cette France du dix-neuvieme siecle, a qui Mirabeau a
fait sa liberte et Napoleon sa puissance[a]."

Qu'on pardonne a l'auteur de ce drame de se citer ici lui-meme; ses
paroles ont si peu le don de se graver dans les esprits, qu'il aurait
souvent besoin de les rappeler. D'ailleurs, aujourd'hui, il n'est
peut-etre point hors de propos de remettre sous les yeux des lecteurs
les deux pages qu'on vient de transcrire. Ce n'est pas que ce
drame puisse en rien meriter le beau nom d'art nouveau, de _poesie
nouvelle_, loin de la; mais c'est que le principe de la liberte en
litterature vient de faire un pas; c'est qu'un progres vient de
s'accomplir, non dans l'art, ce drame est trop peu de chose, mais
dans le public; c'est que, sous ce rapport du moins, une partie des
pronostics hasardes plus haut viennent de se realiser.

Il y avait peril, en effet, a changer ainsi brusquement d'auditoire, a
risquer sur le theatre des tentatives confiees jusqu'ici seulement au
papier _qui souffre tout_; le public des livres est bien different
du public des spectacles, et l'on pouvait craindre de voir le second
repousser ce que le premier avait accepte. Il n'en a rien ete. Le
principe de la liberte litteraire, deja compris par le monde qui lit
et qui medite, n'a pas ete moins completement adopte par cette immense
foule, avide des pures emotions de l'art, qui inonde chaque soir
les theatres de Paris. Cette voix haute et puissante du peuple, qui
ressemble a celle de Dieu, veut desormais que la poesie ait la meme
devise que la politique: TOLERANCE ET LIBERTE.

Maintenant vienne le poete! il y a un public.

Et cette liberte, le public la veut telle qu'elle doit etre, se
conciliant avec l'ordre, dans l'etat, avec l'art, dans la litterature.
La liberte a une sagesse qui lui est propre, et sans laquelle elle
n'est pas complete. Que les vieilles regles de d'Aubignac[3] meurent
avec les vieilles coutumes de Cujas[4], cela est bien; qu'a une
litterature de cour succede une litterature de peuple, cela est mieux
encore; mais surtout qu'une raison interieure se rencontre au fond de
toutes ces nouveautes. Que le principe de liberte fasse son affaire,
mais qu'il la fasse bien. Dans les lettres, comme dans la societe,
point d'etiquette, point d'anarchie des lois. Ni talons rouges, ni
bonnets rouges[5].

Voila ce que veut le public, et il veut bien. Quant a nous, par
deference pour ce public qui a accueilli avec tant d'indulgence un
essai qui en meritait si peu, nous lui donnons ce drame aujourd'hui
tel qu'il a ete represente. Le jour viendra peut-etre de le publier
tel qu'il a ete concu par l'auteur[b], en indiquant et en discutant
les modifications que la scene lui a fait subir. Ces details de
critique peuvent ne pas etre sans interet ni sans enseignements,
mais ils sembleraient minutieux aujourd'hui; la liberte de l'art est
admise, la question principale est resolue; a quoi bon s'arreter aux
questions secondaires? Nous y reviendrons du reste quelque jour,
et nous parlerons aussi, bien en detail, en la ruinant par les
raisonnements et par les faits, de cette censure dramatique qui est le
seul obstacle a la liberte du theatre, maintenant qu'il n'y en a
plus dans le public. Nous essayerons, a nos risques et perils et par
devouement aux choses de l'art, de caracteriser les mille abus
de cette petite inquisition de l'esprit, qui a, comme l'autre
saint-office[6], ses juges secrets, ses bourreaux masques, ses
tortures, ses mutilations et sa peine de mort. Nous dechirerons, s'il
se peut, ces langes de police dont il est honteux que le theatre soit
encore emmaillote au dix-neuvieme siecle.

Aujourd'hui il ne doit y avoir place que pour la reconnaissance et les
remerciements. C'est au public que l'auteur de ce drame adresse les
siens, et du fond du coeur. Cette oeuvre, non de talent, mais de
conscience et de liberte, a ete genereusement protegee contre bien des
inimities par le public, parce que le public est toujours, aussi lui,
consciencieux et libre. Graces lui soient donc rendues, ainsi qu'a
cette jeunesse puissante qui a porte aide et faveur a l'ouvrage d'un
jeune homme sincere et independant comme elle! C'est pour elle surtout
qu'il travaille, parce que ce serait une gloire bien haute que
l'applaudissement de cette elite de jeunes hommes, intelligente,
logique, consequente, vraiment liberale en litterature comme en
politique, noble generation qui ne se refuse pas a ouvrir les deux
yeux a la verite et a recevoir la lumiere des deux cotes.

Quant a son oeuvre en elle-meme, il n'en parlera pas. Il accepte les
critiques qui en ont ete faites, les plus severes comme les plus
bienveillantes, parce qu'on peut profiter a toutes. Il n'ose se
flatter que tout le monde ait compris du premier coup ce drame,
dont le _Romancero general_[7] est la veritable clef. Il prierait
volontiers les personnes que cet ouvrage a pu choquer de relire _le
Cid Don Sanche, Nicomede_, ou plutot tout Corneille et tout Moliere,
ces grands et admirables poetes[8]. Cette lecture, si pourtant elles
veulent bien faire d'abord la part de l'immense inferiorite de
l'auteur d'_Hernani_, les rendra peut-etre moins severes pour
certaines choses qui ont pu les blesser dans la forme ou dans le fond
de ce drame. En somme, le moment n'est peut-etre pas encore venu de le
juger. _Hernani_ n'est jusqu'ici que la premiere pierre d'un edifice
qui existe tout construit dans la tete de son auteur, mais dont
l'ensemble peut seul donner quelque valeur a ce drame. Peut-etre ne
trouvera-t-on pas mauvaise un jour la fantaisie qui lui a pris de
mettre, comme l'architecte de Bourges[9], une porte presque moresque a
sa cathedrale gothique.

En attendant, ce qu'il a fait est bien peu de chose, il le sait.
Puissent le temps et la force ne pas lui manquer pour achever son
oeuvre! Elle ne vaudra qu'autant qu'elle sera terminee. Il n'est pas
des ces poetes privilegies qui peuvent mourir ou s'interrompre avant
d'avoir fini, sans peril pour leur memoire; il n'est pas de ceux qui
restent grands, meme sans avoir complete leur ouvrage, heureux hommes
dont on peut dire ce que Virgile disait de Carthage ebauchee:

           Pendent opera interrupta, minaeque[10]
     Murorum ingentes!

                                               9 mars 1830.


[a] _Lettre aux editeurs des poesies de M. Dovalle_.

[b] Ce jour, predit par l'auteur, est venu. Nous donnons dans cette
edition _Hernani_ tout entier, tel que le poete l'avait ecrit, avec
les developpements de passion, les details de moeurs et les saillies
de caracteres que la representation avait retranches. Quant a la
discussion critique que l'auteur indique, elle sortira d'elle-meme,
pour tous les lecteurs, de la comparaison qu'ils pourront faire
entre l'Hernani tronque du theatre et l'Hernani de cette edition.
Esperons tout des progres que le public des theatres fait chaque jour.

Mai 1836.                                (_Note de l'editeur_.)




                       PERSONNAGES.


    HERNANI.                   DON MATIAS.
    DON CARLOS.                DON RICARDO.
    DON RUY GOMEZ DE SILVA.    DON FRANCISCO.
    DONA SOL DE SILVA.         DON GARCI SUAREZ.
    LE ROI DE BOHEME.          DON JUAN DE HARO.
    LE DUC DE BAVIERE.         DON GIL TELLEZ GIRON.
    LE DUC DE GOTHA.           DONA JOSEFA DUARTE.
    LE DUC DE LUTZELBOURG.     Un montagnard.
    JAQUEZ.                    Une dame.
    DON SANCHO.

    Premier conjure. Deuxieme conjure. Troisieme conjure.
  Conjures de la ligue sacro-sainte, Allemands et Espagnols.
       Montagnards, seigneurs, soldats, pages, peuple.

                      Espagne, 1519.




HERNANI.




ACTE PREMIER - LE ROI.


SARAGOSSE.

_Une chambre a coucher. La nuit. Une lampe sur la table_.




SCENE PREMIERE.

DONA JOSEFA DUARTE (_vieille, en noir, avec le corps de sa jupe cousu
de jais, a la mode d'Isabelle la Catholique_[1]); DON CARLOS.


DONA JOSEFA (_seule_). _Elle ferme les rideaux cramoisis de la fenetre
et met en ordre quelques fauteuils. On frappe a une petite porte
derobee a droite. Elle ecoute. On frappe un second coup_.
    Serait-ce deja lui?

_Un nouveau coup_.
    C'est bien a l'escalier
    Derobe.

_Un quatrieme coup_.
    Vite, ouvrons.

_Elle ouvre la petite porte masquee. Entre don Carlos, le manteau sur
le nez et le chapeau sur les yeux_.
    Bonjour, beau cavalier.

_Elle l'introduit. Il ecarte son manteau et laisse voir un riche
costume de velours et de soie, a la mode castillane de 1519. Elle le
regarde sous le nez[2] et recule etonnee_.
    Quoi, seigneur Hernani, ce n'est pas vous!--Main-forte[3]! Au feu!

DON CARLOS (_lui saisissant le bras_).
    Deux mots de plus, duegne, vous etes morte!

_Il la regarde fixement. Elle se tait, effrayee_.
    Suis-je chez dona Sol? fiancee au vieux duc[4]
    De Pastrana, son oncle, un bon seigneur, caduc,
    Venerable et jaloux? dites? La belle adore
    Un cavalier sans barbe et sans moustache encore,
    Et recoit tous les soirs, malgre les envieux,
    Le jeune amant sans barbe a la barbe du vieux.
    Suis-je bien informe?

_Elle se tait. Il la secoue par le bras_.
    Vous repondrez peut-etre?

DONA JOSEFA.
    Vous m'avez defendu de dire deux mots, maitre.

DON CARLOS.
    Aussi n'en veux-je qu'un.--Oui,--non.--Ta dame est bien
    Dona Sol de Silva? parle.

DONA JOSEFA.
    Oui.--Pourquoi?

DON CARLOS.
    Pour rien. Le duc, son vieux futur[5], est absent a cette heure?

DONA JOSEFA.
    Oui.

DON CARLOS.
    Sans doute elle attend son jeune?

DONA JOSEFA.
    Oui.

DON CARLOS.
    Que je meure!

DONA JOSEFA.
    Oui.

DON CARLOS.
    Duegne, c'est ici qu'aura lieu l'entretien?

DONA JOSEFA.
    Oui.

DON CARLOS.
    Cache-moi ceans.

DONA JOSEFA.
    Vous!

DON CARLOS.
    Moi.

DONA JOSEFA.
    Pourquoi?

DON CARLOS.
    Pour rien.

DONA JOSEFA.
    Moi! vous cacher!

DON CARLOS.
    Ici.

DONA JOSEFA.
    Jamais!

DON CARLOS (_tirant de sa ceinture un poignard et une bourse_).
    Daignez, madame,
    Choisir de cette bourse ou bien de cette lame.

DONA JOSEFA (_prenant la bourse_).
    Vous etes donc le diable?

DON CARLOS.
    Oui, duegne.

DONA JOSEFA (_ouvrant une armoire etroite dans le mur_).
    Entrez ici.

DON CARLOS (_examinant l'armoire_).
    Cette boite?

DONA JOSEFA (_la refermant_).
    Va-t'en, si tu n'en veux pas.

DON CARLOS (_rouvrant l'armoire_).
    Si![6]

_L'examinant encore_.
    Serait-ce l'ecurie ou tu mets d'aventure
    Le manche du balai[7] qui te sert de monture?

_Il s'y blottit avec peine_.
    Ouf!

DONA JOSEFA (_joignant les mains et scandalisee_).
    Un homme ici!

DON CARLOS (_dans l'armoire restee ouverte_).
    C'est une femme, est-ce pas[8],
    Qu'attendait ta maitresse?

DONA JOSEFA.
    O ciel! j'entends le pas
    De dona Sol.--Seigneur, fermez vite la porte.

_Elle pousse la porte de l'armoire, qui se referme_.

DON CARLOS (_de l'interieure de l'armoire_).
    Si vous dites un mot, duegne, vous etes morte.

DONA JOSEFA (_seule_).
    Qu'est cet homme? Jesus mon Dieu! Si j'appelais?
    Qui? Hors madame et moi, tout dort dans le palais.
    Bah! l'autre va venir. La chose le regarde.
    Il a sa bonne epee, et que le ciel nous garde
    De l'enfer!

_Pesant la bourse_.
    Apres tout, ce n'est pas un voleur[9].

_Entre dona Sol, en blanc. Dona Josefa cache la bourse_.




SCENE II.

DONA JOSEFA, DON CARLOS (_cache_); DONA SOL. _Puis_ HERNANI.


DONA SOL.
    Josefa!

DONA JOSEFA.
    Madame?

DONA SOL.
    Ah! je crains quelque malheur.
    Hernani devrait etre ici.

_Bruit de pas a la petite porte_.
    Voici qu'il monte.
    Ouvre avant qu'il ne frappe, et fais vite, et sois prompte.

_Josefa ouvre la petite porte. Entre Hernani. Grand manteau, grand
chapeau. Dessous, un costume de montagnard d'Aragon, gris, avec une
cuirasse de cuir, une epee, un poignard, et un cor a la ceinture_.

DONA SOL (_courant a lui_).
    Hernani!

HERNANI.
    Dona Sol! Ah! c'est vous que je vois
    Enfin! et cette voix qui parle est votre voix!
    Pourquoi le sort mit-il mes jours si loin des votres?
    J'ai tant besoin de vous pour oublier les autres!

DONA SOL (_touchant ses vetements_).
    Jesus! votre manteau ruisselle! il pleut donc bien?

HERNANI.
    Je ne sais.

DONA SOL.
    Vous devez avoir froid!

HERNANI.
    Ce n'est rien.

DONA SOL.
    Otez donc ce manteau.

HERNANI.
    Dona Sol, mon amie,
    Dites-moi, quand la nuit vous etes endormie,
    Calme, innocente et pure, et qu'un sommeil joyeux
    Entr'ouvre votre bouche et du doigt clot vos yeux,
    Un ange vous dit-il combien vous etes douce
    Au malheureux que tout abandonne et repousse?

DONA SOL.
    Vous avez bien tarde, seigneur! Mais dites-moi
    Si vous avez froid.

HERNANI.
    Moi! je brule pres de toi!
    Ah! quand l'amour jaloux bouillonne dans nos tetes,
    Quand notre coeur se gonfle et s'emplit de tempetes,
    Qu'importe ce que peut un nuage des airs
    Nous jeter en passant de tempete et d'eclairs[10]!

DONA SOL (_lui defaisant son manteau_).
    Allons! donnez la cape,--et l'epee avec elle.

HERNANI (_la main sur son epee_).
    Non. C'est mon autre amie, innocente et fidele.
    --Dona Sol, le vieux duc, votre futur epoux,
    Votre oncle, est donc absent?

DONA SOL.
    Oui, cette heure est a nous.

HERNANI.
    Cette heure! Et voila tout. Pour nous, plus rien qu'une heure!
    Apres, qu'importe? il faut qu'on oublie ou qu'on meure.
    Ange! une heure avec vous! une heure, en verite,
    A qui voudrait la vie, et puis l'eternite!

DONA SOL.
    Hernani!

HERNANI (_amerement_).
    Que je suis heureux que le duc sorte!
    Comme un larron qui tremble et qui force une porte;
    Vite, j'entre, et vous vois, et derobe au vieillard
    Une heure de vos chants et de votre regard;
    Et je suis bien heureux, et sans doute on m'envie
    De lui voler une heure, et lui me prend ma vie!

DONA SOL.
    Calmez-vous.

_Remettant le manteau a la duegne_.
    Josefa, fais secher le manteau.

_Josefa sort. Elle s'assied et fait signe a Hernani de venir pres
d'elle_.
    Venez la.

HERNANI (_sans l'entendre_).
    Donc le duc est absent du chateau?

DONA SOL (_souriant_).
    Comme vous etes grand!

HERNANI.
    Il est absent.

DONA SOL.
    Chere ame,
    Ne pensons plus au duc.

HERNANI.
    Ah! pensons-y, madame!
    Ce vieillard! il vous aime, il va vous epouser!
    Quoi donc! vous prit-il pas l'autre jour un baiser?
    N'y plus penser!

DONA SOL (_riant_).
    C'est la ce qui vous desespere!
    Un baiser d'oncle! au front! presque un baiser de pere!

HERNANI.
    Non. Un baiser d'amant, de mari, de jaloux.
    Ah! vous serez a lui, madame! Y pensez-vous?
    O l'insense vieillard, qui, la tete inclinee,
    Pour achever sa route et finir sa journee,
    A besoin d'une femme, et va, spectre glace,
    Prendre une jeune fille! o vieillard insense!
    Pendant que d'une main il s'attache a la votre,
    Ne voit-il pas la mort qui l'epouse de l'autre?
    Il vient dans nos amours se jeter sans frayeur!
    Vieillard, va-t'en donner mesure au fossoyeur!
    --Qui fait ce mariage? On vous force, j'espere!

DONA SOL.
    Le roi, dit-on, le veut.

HERNANI.
    Le roi! le roi! Mon pere
    Est mort sur l'echafaud[11], condamne par le sien.
    Or, quoiqu'on ait vieilli depuis ce fait ancien,
    Pour l'ombre du feu roi, pour son fils, pour sa veuve,
    Pour tous les siens, ma haine est encor toute neuve!
    Lui, mort, ne compte plus. Et, tout enfant, je fis
    Le serment de venger mon pere sur son fils.
    Je te cherchais partout, Carlos, roi des Castilles!
    Car la haine est vivace entre nos deux familles.
    Les peres ont lutte sans pitie, sans remords,
    Trente ans! Or, c'est en vain que les peres sont morts.
    Leur haine vit. Pour eux la paix n'est point venue,
    Car les fils sont debout, et le duel continue.
    Ah! c'est donc toi qui veux cet execrable hymen!
    Tant mieux. Je te cherchais, tu viens dans mon chemin!

DONA SOL.
    Vous m'effrayez.

HERNANI.
    Charge d'un mandat d'anatheme,
    Il faut que j'en arrive a m'effrayer moi-meme[12]!
    Ecoutez. L'homme auquel, jeune, on vous destina,
    Ruy de Silva, votre oncle, est duc de Pastrafia,
    Riche-homme[13] d'Aragon, comte et grand de Castille[14].
    A defaut de jeunesse, il peut, o jeune fille,
    Vous apporter tant d'or, de bijoux, de joyaux,
    Que votre front reluise entre des fronts royaux,
    Et pour le rang, l'orgueil, la gloire et la richesse,
    Mainte reine peut-etre envira[15] sa duchesse.
    Voila donc ce qu'il est. Moi, je suis pauvre, et n'eus
    Tout enfant, que les bois ou je fuyais pieds nus.
    Peut-etre aurais-je aussi[16] quelque blason illustre
    Qu'une rouille de sang a cette heure delustre;
    Peut-etre ai-je des droits, dans l'ombre ensevelis,
    Qu'un drap d'echafaud noir cache encor sous ses plis,
    Et qui, si mon attente un jour n'est pas trompee,
    Pourront de ce fourreau sortir avec l'epee.
    En attendant, je n'ai recu du ciel jaloux
    Que l'air, le jour et l'eau, la dot qu'il donne a tous.
    Or du duc ou de moi souffrez qu'on vous delivre.
    Il faut choisir des deux, l'epouser, ou me suivre.

DONA SOL.
    Je vous suivrai.

HERNANI.
    Parmi mes rudes compagnons?
    Proscrits dont le bourreau sait d'avance les noms.
    Gens dont jamais le fer ni le coeur ne s'emousse,
    Ayant tous quelque sang a venger qui les pousse?
    Vous viendrez commander ma bande, comme on dit[17]?
    Car, vous ne savez pas, moi, je suis un bandit!
    Quand tout me poursuivait dans toutes les Espagnes[18],
    Seule, dans ses forets, dans ses hautes montagnes,
    Dans ses rocs ou l'on n'est que de l'aigle apercu,
    La vieille Catalogne[19] en mere m'a recu.
    Parmi ses montagnards, libres, pauvres, et graves,
    Je grandis, et demain trois mille de ses braves,
    Si ma voix dans leurs monts fait resonner ce cor,
    Viendront... Vous frissonnez. Reflechissez encor.
    Me suivre dans les bois, dans les monts, sur les greves,
    Chez des hommes pareils aux demons de vos reves,
    Soupconner tout, les yeux, les voix, les pas, le bruit,
    Dormir sur l'herbe, boire au torrent, et la nuit
    Entendre, en allaitant quelque enfant qui s'eveille,
    Les balles des mousquets siffler a votre oreille.
    Etre errante avec moi, proscrite, et, s'il le faut,
    Me suivre ou je suivrai mon pere,--a l'echafaud.

DONA SOL.
    Je vous suivrai.

HERNANI.
    Le duc est riche, grand, prospere.
    Le duc n'a pas de tache au vieux nom de son pere.
    Le duc peut tout. Le duc vous offre avec sa main
    Tresors, titres, bonheur...

DONA SOL.
    Nous partirons demain.
    Hernani, n'allez pas sur mon audace etrange
    Me blamer. Etes-vous mon demon ou mon ange?
    Je ne sais, mais je suis votre esclave. Ecoutez.
    Allez ou vous voudrez, j'irai. Restez, partez,
    Je suis a vous. Pourquoi fais-je ainsi? je l'ignore.
    J'ai besoin de vous voir et de vous voir encore
    Et de vous voir toujours. Quand le bruit de vos pas
    S'efface, alors je crois que mon coeur ne bat pas,
    Vous me manquez, je suis absente de moi-meme;
    Mais des qu'enfin ce pas que j'attends et que j'aime
    Vient frapper mon oreille, alors il me souvient[20]
    Que je vis, et je sens mon ame qui revient!

HERNANI (_la serrant dans ses bras_).
    Ange!

DONA SOL.
    A minuit. Demain. Amenez votre escorte,
    Sous ma fenetre. Allez, je serai brave et forte.
    Vous frapperez trois coups.

HERNANI.
    Savez-vous qui je suis,
    Maintenant?

DONA SOL.
    Monseigneur, qu'importe! Je vous suis.

HERNANI.
    Non, puisque vous voulez me suivre, faible femme,
    Il faut que vous sachiez quel nom, quel rang, quelle ame
    Quel destin est cache dans le patre Hernani.
    Vous vouliez d'un brigand, voulez-vous d'un banni?

DON CARLOS (_ouvrant avec fracas la porte de l'armoire_).
    Quand aurez-vous fini de conter votre histoire?
    Croyez-vous donc qu'on soit a l'aise en cette armoire?

_Hernani recule etonne. Dona Sol pousse un cri et se refugie dans
ses bras, en fixant sur don Carlos des yeux effares_.

HERNANI (_la main sur la garde de son epee_).
    Quel est cet homme?

DONA SOL.
    O ciel! Au secours!

HERNANI.
    Taisez-vous,
    Dona Sol! vous donnez l'eveil aux yeux jaloux.
    Quand je suis pres de vous, veuillez, quoi qu'il advienne[21],
    Ne reclamer jamais d'autre aide que la mienne.

_A don Carlos_.
    Que faisiez-vous la?

DON CARLOS.
    Moi? mais, a ce qu'il parait[22],
    je ne chevauchais pas a travers la foret.

HERNANI.
    Qui raille apres l'affront s'expose a faire rire
    Aussi son heritier.

DON CARLOS.
    Chacun son tour!--Messire,
    Parlons franc. Vous aimez madame et ses yeux noirs,
    Vous y venez mirer les votres tous les soirs,
    C'est fort bien. J'aime aussi madame, et veux connaitre[23]
    Qui j'ai vu tant de fois entrer par la fenetre,
    Tandis que je restais a la porte.

HERNANI.
    En honneur,
    Je vous ferai sortir par ou j'entre, seigneur.

DON CARLOS.
    Nous verrons. J'offre donc mon amour a madame[24].
    Partageons. Voulez-vous? J'ai vu dans sa belle ame
    Tant d'amour, de bonte, de tendres sentiments,
    Que madame a coup sur en a pour deux amants.
    Or, ce soir, voulant mettre a fin mon entreprise,
    Pris, je pense, pour vous, j'entre ici par surprise,
    Je me cache, j'ecoute, a ne vous celer rien;
    Mais j'entendais tres mal et j'etouffais tres bien.
    Et puis, je chiffonnais ma veste a la francaise[25].
    Ma foi, je sors!

HERNANI.
    Ma dague aussi n'est pas a l'aise
    Et veut sortir.

DON CARLOS (_le saluant_).
    Monsieur, c'est comme il vous plaira.

HERNANI (_tirant son epee_).
    En garde!

_Don Carlos tire son epee_.

DONA SOL (_se jetant entre eux_).
    Hernani! ciel!

DON CARLOS.
    Calmez-vous, senora.

HERNANI (_a don Carlos_).
    Dites-moi votre nom.

DON CARLOS.
    He! dites-moi le votre!

HERNANI.
    Je le garde, secret et fatal, pour un autre
    Qui doit un jour sentir, sous mon genou vainqueur,
    Mon nom a son oreille, et ma dague a son coeur!

DON CARLOS.
    Alors, quel est le nom de l'autre?

HERNANI.
    Que t'importe?
    En garde! defends-toi!

_Ils croisent leurs epees. Dona Sol tombe tremblante sur un fauteuil.
On entend des coups a la porte_.

DONA SOL (_se levant avec effroi_).
    Ciel! on frappe a la porte!

_Les champions s'arretent. Entre Josefa par la petite porte et tout
effaree_.

HERNANI (_a Josefa_).
    Qui frappe ainsi?

DONA JOSEFA (a dona Sol).
    Madame! un coup inattendu!
    C'est le duc qui revient!

DONA SOL (_joignant les mains_).
    Le duc! tout est perdu!
    Malheureuse!

DONA JOSEFA (_jetant les yeux autour d'elle_).
    Jesus! l'inconnu! des epees!
    On se battait! Voila de belles equipees[26]!

_Les deux combattants remettent leurs epees dans le fourreau. Don
Carlos s'enveloppe dans son manteau et rabat son chapeau sur ses
yeux. On frappe_.

HERNANI.
    Que faire?

_On frappe_.

UNE VOIX (_au dehors_).
    Dona Sol, ouvrez-moi!

_Dona Josefa fait un pas vers la porte. Hernani l'arrete_.

HERNANI.
    N'ouvrez-pas!

DONA JOSEFA (_tirant son chapelet_).
    Saint Jacques monseigneur[27]! tirez-nous de ce pas!

_On frappe de nouveau_.

HERNANI (_montrant l'armoire a Don Carlos_).
    Cachons-nous.

DON CARLOS.
    Dans l'armoire?

HERNANI (_montrant la porte_).
    Entrez-y. Je m'en charge.
    Nous y tiendrons tous deux.

DON CARLOS.
    Grand merci, c'est trop large!

HERNANI (_montrant la petite porte_).
    Fuyons par la.

DON CARLOS.
    Bonsoir. Pour moi, je reste ici.

HERNANI.
    Ah! tete et sang[28]! monsieur, vous me pairez ceci!

_A dona Sol_.
    Si je barricadais l'entree?

DON CARLOS (_a Josefa_).
    Ouvrez la porte.

HERNANI.
    Que dit-il?

DON CARLOS (_a Josefa interdite_).
    Ouvrez donc, vous dis-je!

_On frappe toujours. Dona Josefa va ouvrir en tremblant_.

DONA SOL.
    Je suis morte!




SCENE III.

LES MEMES. DON RUY GOMEZ DE SILVA, _barbe et cheveux blancs; en noir._
VALETS _avec des flambeaux_.


DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Des hommes chez ma niece a cette heure de nuit!
    Venez tous! cela vaut la lumiere et le bruit.

_A dona Sol_.
    Par saint Jean d'Avila, je crois que, sur mon ame,
    Nous sommes trois chez vous! C'est trop de deux[29], madame.

_Aux deux jeunes gens_.
    Mes jeunes cavaliers, que faites-vous ceans?
    Quand nous avions le Cid[30] et Bernard[31], ces geants
    De l'Espagne et du monde allaient par les Castilles
    Honorant les vieillards et protegeant les filles.
    C'etaient des hommes forts et qui trouvaient moins lourds
    Leur fer et leur acier que vous votre velours.
    Ces hommes-la portaient respect aux barbes grises,
    Faisaient agenouiller leur amour aux eglises[32],
    Ne trahissaient personne, et donnaient pour raison
    Qu'ils avaient a garder l'honneur de leur maison.
    S'ils voulaient une femme, ils la prenaient sans tache,
    En plein jour, devant tous, et l'epee, ou la hache,
    Ou la lance a la main.--Et quant a ces felons
    Qui, le soir, et les yeux tournes vers leurs talons,
    Ne fiant qu'a la nuit leurs manoeuvres infames,
    Par derriere aux maris volent l'honneur des femmes,
    J'affirme que le Cid, cet aieul de nous tous,
    Les eut tenus pour vils et fait mettre a genoux,
    Et qu'il eut, degradant leur noblesse usurpee,
    Soufflete leur blason du plat de son epee!
    Voila ce que feraient, j'y songe avec ennui,
    Les hommes d'autrefois aux hommes d'aujourd'hui.
    --Qu'etes-vous venus faire ici? C'est donc a dire
    Que je ne suis qu'un vieux dont les jeunes vont rire?
    On va rire de moi, soldat de Zamora[33]?
    Et quand je passerai, tete blanche, on rira?
    Ce n'est pas vous, du moins, qui rirez!

HERNANI.
    Duc...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Silence!
    Quoi! vous avez l'epee, et la dague, et la lance,
    La chasse, les festins, les meutes, les faucons,
    Les chansons a chanter le soir sous les balcons,
    Les plumes au chapeau, les casaques de soie,
    Les bals, les carrousels[34], la jeunesse, la joie,
    Enfants, l'ennui vous gagne! A toux prix, au hasard,
    Il vous faut un hochet. Vous prenez un vieillard.
    Ah! vous l'avez brise, le hochet! mais Dieu fasse
    Qu'il vous puisse en eclats rejaillir a la face!
    Suivez-moi!

HERNANI.
    Seigneur duc...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Suivez-moi! suivez-moi!
    Messieurs, avons-nous fait cela pour rire? Quoi!
    Un tresor est chez moi. C'est l'honneur d'une fille,
    D'une femme, l'honneur de toute une famille,
    Cette fille, je l'aime, elle est ma niece, et doit
    Bientot changer sa bague a l'anneau de mon doigt,
    Je la crois chaste et pure et sacree a tout homme,
    Or il faut que[35] je sorte une heure, et moi qu'on nomme
    Ruy Gomez de Silva, je ne puis l'essayer
    Sans qu'un larron d'honneur se glisse a mon foyer!
    Arriere! lavez donc vos mains, hommes sans ames,
    Car, rien qu'en y touchant, vous nous tachez nos femmes,
    Non. C'est bien. Poursuivez. Ai-je autre chose encor?

_Il arrache son collier_.
    Tenez, foulez aux pieds, foulez ma toison d'or[36]!

_Il jette son chapeau_.
    Arrachez mes cheveux, faites-en chose vile!
    Et vous pourrez demain vous vanter par la ville
    Que jamais debauches, dans leurs jeux insolents,
    N'ont sur plus noble front souille cheveux plus blancs.

DONA SOL.
    Monseigneur...

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a ses valets_).
    Ecuyers! ecuyers! a mon aide!
    Ma hache, mon poignard, ma dague de Tolede!

_Aux deux jeunes gens_.
    Et suivez-moi tous deux!

DON CARLOS (_faisant un pas_).
    Duc, ce n'est pas d'abord
    De cela qu'il s'agit. Il s'agit de la mort
    De Maximilien, empereur d'Allemagne.

_Il jette son manteau, et decouvre son visage cache par son chapeau_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Raillez-vous?...--Dieu! le roi!

DONA SOL.
    Le roi!

HERNANI (_dont les yeux s'allument_).
    Le roi d'Espagne!

DON CARLOS (_gravement_).
    Oui, Carlos.--Seigneur duc, es-tu donc insense?
    Mon aieul l'empereur est mort. Je ne le sai
    Que de ce soir. Je viens, tout en hate, et moi-meme,
    Dire la chose, a toi, feal[37] sujet que j'aime,
    Te demander conseil, incognito, la nuit,
    Et l'affaire est bien simple, et voila bien du bruit!

_Don Ruy Gomez renvoie ses gens d'un signe. Il s'approche de don
Carlos que dona Sol examine avec crainte et surprise, et sur lequel
Hernani demeure dans un coin fixe des yeux etincelants_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Mais pourquoi tarder tant a m'ouvrir cette porte?

DON CARLOS.
    Belle raison! tu viens avec toute une escorte!
    Quand un secret d'Etat m'amene en ton palais[38],
    Duc, est-ce pour l'aller dire[39] a tous tes valets!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Altesse, pardonnez! l'apparence...

DON CARLOS.
    Bon pere,
    Je t'ai fait gouverneur du chateau de Figuere[40],
    Mais qui dois-je a present faire ton gouverneur?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Pardonnez...

DON CARLOS.
    Il suffit. N'en parlons plus, seigneur.
    Donc l'empereur est mort[41].

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    L'aieul de votre altesse
    Est mort?

DON CARLOS.
    Duc, tu m'en vois penetre de tristesse.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Qui lui succede?

DON CARLOS.
    Un duc de Saxe est sur les rangs.
    Francois premier, de France, est un des concurrents.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Ou vont se rassembler les electeurs d'empire?

DON CARLOS.
    Ils ont choisi, je crois, Aix-la-Chapelle[42], ou Spire[43],
    Ou Francfort[44].

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Notre roi, dont Dieu garde les jours,
    N'a-t-il pense jamais a l'empire?

DON CARLOS.
    Toujours.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    C'est a vous qu'il revient.

DON CARLOS.
    Je le sais.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Votre pere
    Fut archiduc d'Autriche, et l'empire, j'espere,
    Aura ceci present[45], que c'etait votre aieul,
    Celui qui vient de choir de la pourpre au linceul.

DON CARLOS.
    Et puis, on est bourgeois de Gand[46].

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Dans mon jeune age
    Je le vis, votre aieul. Helas! seul je surnage
    D'un siecle tout entier. Tout est mort a present.
    C'etait un empereur magnifique et puissant.

DON CARLOS.
    Rome est pour moi[47].

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Vaillant, ferme, point tyrannique,
    Cette tete allait bien au vieux corps germanique[48]!

_Il s'incline sur les mains du roi et les baise_.
    Que je vous plains!	Si jeune, en un tel deuil plonge!

DON CARLOS.
    Le pape veut ravoir la Sicile[49], que j'ai,
    Un empereur ne peut posseder la Sicile,
    Il me fait empereur, alors, en fils docile,
    Je lui rends Naple. Ayons l'aigle[50], et puis nous verrons
    Si je lui laisserai rogner les ailerons!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Qu'avec joie il verrait[51], ce veteran du trone,
    Votre front deja large aller a sa couronne!
    Ah! seigneur, avec vous nous le pleurerons bien,
    Cet empereur tres grand, tres bon et tres chretien!

DON CARLOS.
    Le saint-pere est adroit.--Qu'est-ce que la Sicile?
    C'est une ile qui pend a mon royaume, une ile,
    Une piece, un haillon, qui, tout dechiquete,
    Tient a peine a l'Espagne et qui traine a cote.
    --Que ferez-vous, mon fils[52], de cette ile bossue
    Au monde imperial au bout d'un fil cousue?
    Votre empire est mal fait; vite, venez ici,
    Des ciseaux! et coupons!--Tres saint-pere, merci!
    Car de ces pieces-la, si j'ai bonne fortune,
    Je compte au saint-empire en recoudre plus d'une,
    Et, si quelques lambeaux m'en etaient arraches,
    Rapiecer mes etats d'iles et de duches!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Consolez-vous[53]! il est un empire des justes
    Ou l'on revoit les morts plus saints et plus augustes!

DON CARLOS.
    Ce roi Francois premier, c'est un ambitieux!
    Le vieil empereur mort, vite il fait les doux yeux
    A l'empire! A-t-il pas sa France tres chretienne[54]?
    Ah! la part est pourtant belle, et vaut qu'on s'y tienne[55]!
    L'empereur mon aieul disait au roi Louis[56]:
    --Si j'etais Dieu le Pere, et si j'avais deux fils,
    Je ferais l'aine Dieu, le second roi de France.

_Au duc_.
    Crois-tu que Francois puisse avoir quelque esperance?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    C'est un victorieux[57].

DON CARLOS.
    Il faudrait tout changer[58].
    La bulle d'or[59] defend d'elire un etranger.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    A ce compte, seigneur, vous etes roi d'Espagne[60]!

DON CARLOS.
    Je suis bourgeois de Gand[61].

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    La derniere campagne
    A fait monter bien haut le roi Francois premier.

DON CARLOS.
    L'aigle qui va peut-etre eclore a mon cimier
    Peut aussi deployer ses ailes.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Votre altesse
    Sait-elle le latin?

DON CARLOS.
    Mal.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Tant pis. La noblesse
    D'Allemagne aime fort qu'on lui parle latin.

DON CARLOS.
    Ils se contenteront d'un espagnol hautain;
    Car il importe peu, croyez-en le roi Charle,
    Quand la voix parle haut, quelle langue elle parle.
    --Je vais en Flandre. Il faut que ton roi, cher Silva,
    Te revienne empereur. Le roi de France va
    Tout remuer. Je veux le gagner de vitesse.
    Je partirai sous peu.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Vous nous quittez, altesse,
    Sans purger l'Aragon de ces nouveaux bandits
    Qui partout dans nos monts levent leurs fronts hardis?

DON CARLOS.
    J'ordonne au duc d'Arcos d'exterminer la bande.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Donnez-vous aussi l'ordre au chef qui la commande
    De se laisser faire?

DON CARLOS.
    Eh! quel est ce chef? son nom?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Je l'ignore. On le dit un rude compagnon[62].

DON CARLOS.
    Bah! je sais que pour l'heure il se cache en Galice[63],
    Et j'en aurai raison[64] avec quelque milice.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    De faux avis alors le disaient pres d'ici.

DON CARLOS.
    Faux avis!--Cette nuit, tu me loges.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_s'inclinant jusqu'a terre_).
    Merci, Altesse!

_Il appelle ses valets_.
    Faites tous honneur au roi mon hote.

_Les valets rentrent avec des flambeaux. Le duc les range sur deux
haies jusqu'a la porte du fond. Cependant dona Sol s'approche
lentement d'Hernani. Le roi les epie tous deux_.

DONA SOL (_bas a Hernani_).
    Demain, sous ma fenetre, a minuit, et sans faute.
    Vous frapperez des mains trois fois.

HERNANI (_bas_).
    Demain.

DON CARLOS (_a part_).
    Demain!

_Haut a dona Sol vers laquelle il fait un pas avec galanterie_.
    Souffrez que pour rentrer je vous offre la main.

_Il la reconduit a la porte. Elle sort_.

HERNANI (_la main dans sa poitrine sur la poignee de sa dague_).
    Mon bon poignard!

DON CARLOS (_revenant, a part_).
    Notre homme a la mine attrapee.

_Il prend a part Hernani_.
    Je vous ai fait l'honneur de toucher votre epee,
    Monsieur. Vous me seriez suspect pour cent raisons.
    Mais le roi don Carlos repugne aux trahisons.
    Allez. Je daigne encore proteger votre fuite.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_revenant et montrant Hernani_).
    Qu'est ce seigneur?

DON CARLOS.
    Il part. C'est quelqu'un de ma suite.

_Ils sortent avec les valets et les flambeaux, le duc precedant le
roi, une cire a la main_.




SCENE IV.


HERNANI (_seul_).
    Oui, de ta suite, o roi[65]! de ta suite!--J'en suis!
    Nuit et jour, en effet, pas a pas, je te suis.
    Un poignard a la main, l'oeil fixe sur ta trace,
    Je vais. Ma race en moi poursuit en toi ta race.
    Et puis, te voila donc mon rival! Un instant
    Entre aimer et hair je suis reste flottant,
    Mon coeur pour elle et toi n'etait point assez large,
    J'oubliais en l'aimant ta haine qui me charge[66]:
    Mais puisque tu le veux, puisque c'est toi qui viens
    Me faire souvenir, c'est bon, je me souviens!
    Mon amour fait pencher la balance incertaine
    Et tombe tout entier du cote de ma haine.
    Oui, je suis de ta suite, et c'est toi qui l'as dit!
    Va, jamais courtisan de ton lever maudit,
    jamais seigneur baisant ton ombre, ou majordome
    Ayant a te servir abjure son coeur d'homme,
    jamais chiens de palais dresses a suivre un roi
    Ne seront sur tes pas plus assidus que moi!
    Ce qu'ils veulent de toi, tous ces grands de Castille,
    C'est quelque titre creux, quelque hochet qui brille,
    C'est quelque mouton d'or[67] qu'on se va pendre au cou;
    Moi, pour vouloir si peu je ne suis pas si fou!
    Ce que je veux de toi, ce n'est point faveurs vaines,
    C'est l'ame de ton corps, c'est le sang de tes veines,
    C'est tout ce qu'un poignard, furieux et vainqueur,
    En y fouillant longtemps peut prendre[68] au fond d'un coeur.
    Va devant! je te suis. Ma vengeance qui veille
    Avec moi toujours marche et me parle a l'oreille.
    Va! je suis la, j'epie et j'ecoute, et sans bruit
    Mon pas cherche ton pas et le presse et le suit.
    Le jour tu ne pourras, o roi, tourner la tete
    Sans me voir immobile et sombre dans ta fete;
    La nuit tu ne pourras tourner les yeux, o roi,
    Sans voir mes yeux ardents luire derriere toi!

_Il sort par la petite porte_.




ACTE DEUXIEME - LE BANDIT.


SARAGOSSE.

_Un patio[1] du palais de Silva. A gauche, les grands murs du palais,
avec une fenetre a balcon. Au-dessous de la fenetre, une petite porte.
A droite et au fond, des maisons et des rues. Il est nuit. On voit
briller ca et la, aux facades des edifices, quelques fenetres encore
eclairees.




SCENE PREMIERE.

DON CARLOS, DON SANCHO SANCHEZ DE ZUNIGA, COMTE DE MONTEREY, DON
MATIAS CENTURION, MARQUIS D'ALMUNAN, DON RICARDO DE ROXAS, SEIGNEUR DE
CASAPALMA.

_Ils arrivent tous quatre, don Carlos en tete, chapeaux rabattus[2],
enveloppes de longs manteaux dont leurs epees soulevent le bord
inferieur_.

DON CARLOS (_examinant le balcon_).
    Voila bien le balcon, la porte... Mon sang bout.

_Montrant la fenetre qui n'est pas eclairee_.
    Pas de lumiere encor!

_Il promene ses yeux sur les autres croisees eclairees_.
    Des lumieres partout
    Ou je n'en voudrais pas, hors a cette fenetre
    Ou j'en voudrais!

DON SANCHO.
    Seigneur, reparlons de ce traitre.
    Et vous l'avez laisse partir!

DON CARLOS.
    Comme tu dis.

DON MATIAS.
    Et peut-etre c'etait le major des bandits!

DON CARLOS.
    Qu'il en soit le major ou bien le capitaine,
    Jamais roi couronne n'eut mine plus hautaine.

DON SANCHO.
    Son nom, seigneur?

DON CARLOS (_les yeux fixes sur la fenetre_).
    Mufioz... Fernan...

_Avec le geste d'un homme qui se rappelle tout a coup_.
    Un nom en i.

DON SANCHO.
    Hernani, peut-etre?

DON CARLOS.
    Oui.

DON SANCHO.
    C'est lui!

DON MATIAS.
    C'est Hernani?
    Le chef!

DON SANCHO (_au roi_).
    De ses propos vous reste-t-il memoire?

DON CARLOS (_qui ne quitte pas la fenetre des yeux_).
    He! je n'entendais rien dans leur maudite armoire!

DON SANCHO.
    Mais pourquoi le lacher lorsque vous le tenez?

_Don Carlos se tourne gravement et le regarde en face_.

DON CARLOS.
    Comte de Monterey, vous me questionnez.

_Les deux seigneurs reculent et se taisent_.
    Et d'ailleurs ce n'est point le souci qui m'arrete.
    J'en veux a sa maitresse[3] et non point a sa tete.
    J'en suis amoureux fou! Les yeux noirs les plus beaux,
    Mes amis! deux miroirs! deux rayons! deux flambeaux!
    Je n'ai rien entendu de toute leur histoire
    Que ces trois mots: Demain, venez a la nuit noire!
    Mais c'est l'essentiel. Est-ce pas excellent?
    Pendant que ce bandit, a mine de galant,
    S'attarde a quelque meurtre, a creuser quelque tombe,
    Je viens tout doucement denicher sa colombe.

DON RICARDO.
    Altesse, il eut fallu, pour completer le tour,
    Denicher la colombe en tuant le vautour.

DON CARLOS (_a don Ricardo_).
    Comte! un digne conseil! vous avez la main prompte!

DON RICARDO (_s'inclinant profondement_).
    Sous quel titre plait-il au roi que je sois comte?

DON SANCHO (_vivement_).
    C'est meprise!

DON RICARDO (_a don Sancho_).
    Le roi m'a nomme comte.

DON CARLOS.
    Assez!
    Bien.

_A Ricardo_.
    J'ai laisse tomber ce titre. Ramassez.

DON RIARCDO (_s'inclinant de nouveau_).
    Merci, seigneur!

DON SANCHO (_a don Matias_).
    Beau comte! un comte de surprise.

_Le roi se promene au fond, examinant avec impatience les fenetres
eclairees. Les deux seigneurs causent sur le devant_.

DON MATIAS (_a don Sancho_).
    Mais que fera le roi, la belle une fois prise?

DON SANCHO (_regardant Ricardo de travers_).
    Il la fera comtesse, et puis dame d'honneur.
    Puis, qu'il en ait un fils[4], il sera roi.

DON MATIAS.
    Seigneur,
    Allons donc! un batard! Comte, fut-on altesse[5],
    On ne saurait tirer un roi d'une comtesse!

DON SANCHO.
    Il la fera marquise, alors, mon cher marquis.

DON MATIAS.
    On garde les batards pour les pays conquis.
    On les fait vice-rois. C'est a cela qu'ils servent.

_Don Carlos revient_.

DON CARLOS (_regardant avec colere toutes les fenetres eclairees_).
    Dirait-on pas des yeux jaloux qui nous observent?
    Enfin! en voila deux qui s'eteignent! allons!
    Messieurs, que les instants de l'attente sont longs!
    Qui fera marcher l'heure avec plus de vitesse?

DON SANCHO.
    C'est ce que nous disons[6] souvent chez votre altesse.

DON CARLOS.
    Cependant que[7] chez vous mon peuple[8] le redit.

_La derniere fenetre eclairee s'eteint_.
    --La derniere est eteinte!

_Tourne vers le balcon de dona Sol toujours noir_.
    O vitrage maudit!
    Quand t'eclaireras-tu?--Cette nuit est bien sombre.
    Dona Sol, viens briller comme un astre dans l'ombre!

_A don Ricardo_.
    Est-il minuit?

DON RICARDO.
    Minuit bientot.

DON CARLOS.
    Il faut finir
    Pourtant! A tout moment l'autre peut survenir.

_La fenetre de dona Sol s'eclaire. On voit son ombre se dessiner sur
les vitraux lumineux_.
    Mes amis! un flambeau! son ombre a la fenetre!
    Jamais jour ne me fut plus charmant a voir naitre.
    Hatons-nous! faisons-lui le signal qu'elle attend.
    Il faut frapper des mains trois fois. Dans un instant,
    Mes amis, vous allez la voir!--Mais notre nombre
    Va l'effrayer peut-etre... Allez tous trois dans l'ombre
    La-bas, epier l'autre. Amis, partageons-nous
    Les deux amants. Tenez, a moi la dame, a vous
    Le brigand.

DON RICARDO.
    Grand merci!

DON CARLOS.
    S'il vient, de l'embuscade
    Sortez vite, et poussez au drole une estocade[9].
    Pendant qu'il reprendra ses esprits sur le gres[10],
    J'emporterai la belle, et nous rirons apres,
    N'allez pas cependant le tuer! c'est un brave
    Apres tout, et la mort d'un homme est chose grave.

_Les deux seigneurs s'inclinent et sortent. Don Carlos les laisse
 s'eloigner, puis frappe des mains a deux reprises. A la deuxieme fois
la fenetre s'ouvre, et dama Sol parait sur le balcon_.




SCENE II.

DON CARLOS, DONA SOL.


DONA SOL (_au balcon_).
    Est-ce vous, Hernani?

DON CARLOS (_a part_).
    Diable! Ne parlons pas!

_Il frappe de nouveau des mains_.

DONA SOL.
    Je descends.

_Elle referme la fenetre, dont la lumiere disparait. Un moment apres,
la petite porte s'ouvre, et dona Sol en sort, une lampe a la main, sa
mante sur les epaules_.

DONA SOL.
    Hernani!

_Don Carlos rabat son chapeau sur son visage, et s'avance
precipitamment vers elle_.

DONA SOL (_laissant tomber sa lampe_).
    Dieu! ce n'est point son pas!

_Elle veut rentrer. Don Carlos court a elle et la retient par le bras_.

DON CARLOS.
    Dona Sol!

DONA SOL.
    Ce n'est point sa voix! Ah! malheureuse!

DON CARLOS.
    Eh! quelle voix veux-tu qui soit plus amoureuse?
    C'est toujours un amant, et c'est un amant roi!

DONA SOL.
    Le roi!

DON CARLOS.
    Souhaite, ordonne, un royaume est a toi!
    Car celui dont tu veux briser la douce entrave,
    C'est le roi ton seigneur, c'est Carlos ton esclave!

DONA SOL (_cherchant a se degager de ses bras_).
    Au secours, Hernani!

DON CARLOS.
    Le juste et digne effroi!
    Ce n'est pas ton bandit qui te tient, c'est le roi.

DONA SOL.
    Non. Le bandit, c'est vous! N'avez-vous pas de honte?
    Ah! pour vous a la face une rougeur me monte.
    Sont-ce la les exploits dont le roi fera bruit[11]?
    Venir ravir de force une femme la nuit!
    Que mon bandit vaut mieux cent fois! Roi, je proclame
    Que, si l'homme naissait ou le place son ame,
    Si Dieu faisait le rang a la hauteur du coeur,
    Certe, il serait le roi, prince, et vous le voleur!

DON CARLOS (_essayant de l'attirer_).
    Madame...

DONA SOL.
    Oubliez-vous que mon pere etait comte?

DON CARLOS.
    Je vous ferai duchesse.

DONA SOL (_le repoussant_).
    Allez! c'est une honte!

_Elle recule de quelques pas_.
    Il ne peut etre rien entre nous, don Carlos.
    Mon vieux pere a pour vous verse son sang a flots.
    Moi je suis fille noble, et de ce sang jalouse.
    Trop pour la concubine, et trop peu pour l'epouse!

DON CARLOS.
    Princesse?

DONA SOL.
    Roi Carlos, a des filles de rien
    Portez votre amourette, ou je pourrais fort bien,
    Si vous m'osez traiter d'une facon infame,
    Vous montrer que je suis dame, et que je suis femme.

DON CARLOS.
    Eh bien, partagez donc et mon trone et mon nom.
    Venez. Vous serez reine, imperatrice!...

DONA SOL.
    Non.
    C'est un leurre. Et d'ailleurs, altesse, avec franchise,
    S'agit-il pas de vous, s'il faut que je le dise,
    J'aime mieux avec lui, mon Hernani, mon roi,
    Vivre errante, en dehors du monde et de la loi,
    Ayant faim, avant soif, fuyant toute l'annee,
    Partageant jour a jour sa pauvre destinee,
    Abandon, guerre, exil, deuil, misere et terreur,
    Que d'etre imperatrice avec un empereur!

DON CARLOS.
    Que cet homme est heureux!

DONA SOL.
    Quoi! pauvre, proscrit meme!

DON CARLOS.
    Qu'il fait bien d'etre pauvre et proscrit, puis qu'on l'aime!
    Moi, je suis seul! Un ange accompagne ses pas!
    --Donc vous me haissez?

DONA SOL.
    Je ne vous aime pas.

DON CARLOS (_la saisissant avec violence_).
    Eh bien, que vous m'aimiez ou non, cela n'importe!
    Vous viendrez, et ma main plus que la votre est forte.
    Vous viendrez! je vous veux! Pardieu, nous verrons bien
    Si je suis roi d'Espagne et des Indes pour rien!

DONA SOL (_se debattant_).
    Seigneur! oh! par pitie!--Quoi! vous etes altesse,
    Vous etes roi. Duchesse, ou marquise, ou comtesse,
    Vous n'avez qu'a choisir. Les femmes de la cour
    Ont toujours un amour tout pret pour votre amour.
    Mais mon proscrit, qu'a-t-il recu du ciel avare?
    Ah! vous avez Castille, Aragon et Navarre[12],
    Et Murcie[13], et Leon, dix royaumes encor,
    Et les Flamands[14], et l'Inde[15] avec les mines d'or!
    Vous avez un empire auquel nul roi ne touche,
    Si vaste que jamais le soleil ne s'y couche!
    Et, quand vous avez tout, voudrez-vous, vous le roi,
    Me prendre, pauvre fille, a lui qui n'a que moi?

_Elle se jette a ses genoux. Il cherche a l'entrainer_.

DON CARLOS.
    Viens! Je n'ecoute rien. Viens! Si tu m'accompagnes,
    Je te donne, choisis, quatre de mes Espagnes.
    Dis, lesquelles veux-tu? Choisis!

_Elle se debat dans ses bras_.

DONA SOL.
    Pour mon honneur,
    Je ne veux rien de vous que ce poignard, seigneur!

_Elle lui arrache le poignard de sa ceinture. Il la lache et recule_.
    Avancez maintenant! faites un pas!

DON CARLOS.
    La belle!
    Je ne m'etonne plus si l'on aime un rebelle!

_Il veut faire un pas. Elle leve le poignard_.

DONA SOL.
    Pour un pas, je vous tue, et me tue.

_Il recule encore. Elle se detourne et crie avec force_
    Hernani! Hernani!

DON CARLOS.
    Taisez-vous!

DONA SOL (_le poignard leve_).
    Un pas! tout est fini.

DON CARLOS.
    Madame! a cet exces ma douceur est reduite.
    J'ai la pour vous forcer trois hommes de ma suite...

HERNANI (_surgissant tout a coup derriere lui_).
    Vous en oubliez un[16]!

_Le roi se retourne, et voit Hernani immobile derriere lui dans
l'ombre, les bras croises sous le long manteau qui l'enveloppe, et
le large bord de son chapeau releve. Dona Sol pousse un cri, court
a Hernani et l'entoure de ses bras_.




SCENE III.

DON CARLOS, DONA SOL, HERNANI.


HERNANI (_immobile, les bras toujours croises, et ses yeux etincelants
fixes sur le roi_).
    Ah! le ciel m'est temoin
    Que volontiers je l'eusse ete chercher plus loin!

DONA SOL.
    Hernani, sauvez-moi de lui!

HERNANI.
    Soyez tranquille,
    Mon amour!

DON CARLOS.
    Que font donc mes amis par la ville?
    Avoir laisse passer ce chef de bohemiens!

_Appelant_.
    Monterey!

HERNANI.
    Vos amis sont au pouvoir des miens.
    Et ne reclamez pas leur epee impuissante,
    Pour trois qui vous viendraient, il m'en viendrait soixante.
    Soixante dont un seul vous vaut tous quatre. Ainsi
    Vidons entre nous deux notre querelle ici.
    Quoi! vous portiez la main sur cette jeune fille!
    C'etait d'un imprudent, seigneur roi de Castille,
    Et d'un lache!

DON CARLOS (_souriant avec dedain_).
    Seigneur bandit, de vous a moi
    Pas de reproche!

HERNANI.
    Il raille! Oh! je ne suis pas roi;
    Mais quand un roi m'insulte et pour surcroit me raille;
    Ma colere va haut et me monte a sa taille[17],
    Et, prenez garde, on craint, quand on me fait affront,
    Plus qu'un cimier de roi la rougeur de mon front!
    Vous etes insense si quelque espoir vous leurre.

_Il lui saisit le bras_.
    Savez-vous quelle main vous etreint a cette heure?
    Ecoutez. Votre pere a fait mourir le mien,
    Je vous hais. Vous avez pris mon titre et mon bien,
    Je vous hais. Nous aimons tous deux la meme femme,
    Je vous hais, je vous hais,--oui, je te hais dans l'ame![18]

DON CARLOS.
    C'est bien.

HERNANI.
    Ce soir pourtant ma haine etait bien loin.
    Je n'avais qu'un desir, qu'une ardeur, qu'un besoin,
    Dona Sol!--Plein d'amour, j'accourais... Sur mon ame!
    Je vous trouve essayant contre elle un rapt infame!
    Quoi! vous que j'oubliais, sur ma route place!
    Seigneur, je vous le dis, vous etes insense!
    Don Carlos, te voila pris dans ton propre piege.
    Ni fuite, ni secours! je te tiens et t'assiege!
    Seul, entoure partout d'ennemis acharnes,
    Que vas-tu faire?

DON CARLOS (_fierement_).
    Allons! vous me questionnez!

HERNANI.
    Va, va, je ne veux pas qu'un bras obscur te frappe.
    Il ne sied pas qu'ainsi ma vengeance m'echappe.
    Tu ne seras touche par un autre que moi.
    Defends-toi donc.

_Il tire son epee_.

DON CARLOS.
    Je suis votre seigneur le roi.
    Frappez. Mais pas de duel.

HERNANI.
    Seigneur, qu'il te souvienne
    Qu'hier encor ta dague a rencontre la mienne.

DON CARLOS.
    Je le pouvais hier. J'ignorais votre nom,
    Vous ignoriez mon titre. Aujourd'hui, compagnon[19],
    Vous savez qui je suis et je sais qui vous etes.

HERNANI.
    Peut-etre.

DON CARLOS.
    Pas de duel. Assassinez-moi. Faites.

HERNANI.
    Crois-tu donc que les rois a moi[20] me sont sacres?
    Ca[21], te defendras-tu?

DON CARLOS.
    Vous m'assassinerez!

_Hernani recule. Don Carlos fixe des yeux d'aigle sur lui_.
    Ah! vous croyez, bandits, que vos brigades viles
    Pourront impunement s'epandre dans les villes?
    Que teints de sang, charges de meurtres, malheureux!
    Vous pourrez apres tout faire les genereux,
    Et que nous daignerons, nous, victimes trompees,
    Ennoblir vos poignards du choc de nos epees?
    Non, le crime vous tient. Partout vous le trainez.
    Nous, des duels avec vous! arriere! assassinez.

_Hernani, sombre et pensif, tourmente quelques instants de la main la
poignee de son epee, puis se retourne brusquement vers le roi, et
brise la lame sur le pave_.

HERNANI.
    Va-t'en donc!

_Le roi se tourne a demi vers lui et le regarde avec hauteur_.
    Nous aurons des rencontres meilleures.
    Va-t'en.

DON CARLOS.
    C'est bien, monsieur. Je vais dans quelques heures
    Rentrer, moi votre roi, dans le palais ducal.
    Mon premier soin sera de mander le fiscal[22].
    A-t-on fait mettre a prix votre tete?

HERNANI.
    Oui.

DON CARLOS.
    Mon maitre,
    Je vous tiens de ce jour sujet rebelle et traitre.
    Je vous en avertis, partout je vous poursuis.
    Je vous fais mettre au ban du royaume[23].

HERNANI.
    J'y suis
    Deja.

DON CARLOS.
    Bien.

HERNANI.
    Mais la France est aupres de l'Espagne.
    C'est un port[24].

DON CARLOS.
    Je vais etre empereur d'Allemagne.
    Je vous fais mettre au ban de l'empire.

HERNANI.
    A ton gre.
    J'ai le reste du monde ou je te braverai.
    Il est plus d'un asile ou ta puissance tombe[25].

DON CARLOS.
    Et quand j'aurai le monde?

HERNANI.
    Alors j'aurai la tombe.

DON CARLOS.
    Je saurai dejouer vos complots insolents.

HERNANI.
    La vengeance est boiteuse, elle vient a pas lents,
    Mais elle vient.

DON CARLOS (_riant a demi, avec dedain_).
    Toucher a la dame qu'adore
    Ce bandit!

HERNANI (_dont les yeux se rallument_).
    Songes-tu que je te tiens encore?
    Ne me rappelle pas, futur cesar romain,
    Que je t'ai la, chetif et petit dans ma main,
    Et que si je serrais cette main trop loyale
    J'ecraserais dans l'oeuf ton aigle imperiale!

DON CARLOS.
    Faites.

HERNANI.
    Va-t'en! va-t'en!

_Il ote son manteau et le jette sur les epaules du roi_.
    Fuis, et prends ce manteau.
    Car dans nos rangs pour toi je crains quelque couteau.

_Le roi s'enveloppe du manteau_.
    Pars tranquille a present. Ma vengeance alteree[26]
    Pour tout autre que moi fait ta tete sacree.

DON CARLOS.
    Monsieur, vous qui venez de me parler ainsi,
    Ne demandez un jour ni grace ni merci!

_Il sort_.




SCENE IV.

HERNANI, DONA SOL.


DONA SOL (_saisissant la main d'Hernani_).
    Maintenant, fuyons vite.

HERNANI (_la repoussant avec une douceur grave_).
    Il vous sied, mon amie,
    D'etre dans mon malheur toujours plus raffermie,
    De n'y point renoncer, et de vouloir toujours
    Jusqu'au fond, jusqu'au bout, accompagner mes jours.
    C'est un noble dessein, digne d'un coeur fidele!
    Mais, tu le vois, mon Dieu, pour tant accepter d'elle,
    Pour emporter joyeux dans mon antre avec moi
    Ce tresor de beaute qui rend jaloux un roi,
    Pour que ma dona Sol me suive et m'appartienne,
    Pour lui prendre sa vie et la joindre a la mienne,
    Pour l'entrainer sans honte encore et sans regrets,
    Il n'est plus temps; je vois l'echafaud de trop pres.

DONA SOL.
    Que dites-vous?

HERNANI.
    Ce roi que je bravais en face
    Va me punir d'avoir ose lui faire grace.
    Il fuit; deja peut-etre il est dans son palais.
    Il appelle ses gens, ses gardes, ses valets,
    Ses seigneurs, ses bourreaux...

DONA SOL.
    Hernani! Dieu! je tremble.
    Eh bien! hatons-nous donc alors! fuyons ensemble!

HERNANI.
    Ensemble! non, non. L'heure en est passee. Helas!
    Dona Sol, a mes yeux quand tu te revelas
    Bonne, et daignant m'aimer d'un amour secourable,
    J'ai bien pu vous offrir, moi, pauvre miserable,
    Ma montagne, mon bois, mon torrent,--ta pitie
    M'enhardissait,--mon pain de proscrit, la moitie
    Du lit vert et touffu que la foret me donne;
    Mais t'offrir la moitie de l'echafaud! pardonne,
    Dona Sol! l'echafaud, c'est a moi seul!

DONA SOL.
    Pourtant
    Vous me l'aviez promis!

HERNANI (_tombant a ses genoux_).
    Ange! ah! dans cet instant
    Ou la mort vient peut-etre, ou s'approche dans l'ombre
    Un sombre denoument pour un destin bien sombre,
    Je le declare[27] ici, proscrit, trainant au flanc[28]
    Un souci profond, ne dans un berceau sanglant,
    Si noir que soit le deuil qui s'epand sur ma vie,
    Je suis un homme heureux et je veux qu'on m'envie[29];
    Car vous m'avez aime! car vous me l'avez dit!
    Car vous avez tout bas beni mon front maudit!

DONA SOL (_penchee sur sa tete_).
    Hernani!

HERNANI.
    Loue soit le sort doux et propice
    Qui me mit cette fleur au bord du precipice!

_Il se releve_.
    Et ce n'est pas pour vous que je parle en ce lieu,
    Je parle pour le ciel qui m'ecoute, et pour Dieu.

DONA SOL.
    Souffre que je te suive.

HERNANI.
    Ah! ce serait un crime
    Que d'arracher la fleur en tombant dans l'abime.
    Va, j'en ai respire le parfum, c'est assez!
    Renoue a d'autres jours[30] tes jours par moi froisses.
    Epouse ce vieillard. C'est moi qui te delie.
    Je rentre dans ma nuit. Toi, soit heureuse, oublie!

DONA SOL.
    Non, je te suis! je veux ma part de ton linceul!
    Je m'attache a tes pas.

HERNANI (_la serrant dans ses bras_).
    Oh! laisse-moi fuir seul.

_Il la quitte avec un mouvement convulsif_.

DONA SOL (_douloureusement et joignant les mains_).
    Hernani! tu me fuis! Ainsi donc, insensee,
    Avoir donne sa vie, et se voir repoussee,
    Et n'avoir, apres tant d'amour et tant d'ennui[31],
    Pas meme le bonheur de mourir pres de lui!

HERNANI.
    Je suis banni! je suis proscrit! je suis funeste!

DONA SOL.
    Ah! vous etes ingrat!

HERNANI (_revenant sur ses pas_).
    Eh bien, non! non, je reste,
    Tu le veux, me voici. Viens, oh! viens dans mes bras!
    Je reste, et resterai tant que tu le voudras.
    Oublions-les! restons.

_Il s'assied sur un banc_.
    Sieds-toi sur cette pierre.

_Il se place a ses pieds_.
    Des flammes de tes yeux inonde ma paupiere,
    Chante-moi quelque chant comme parfois le soir
    Tu m'en chantais, avec des pleurs dans ton oeil noir.
    Soyons heureux! buvons, car la coupe est remplie,
    Car cette heure est a nous, et le reste est folie.
    Parle-moi, ravis-moi. N'est-ce pas qu'il est doux
    D'aimer et de savoir qu'on vous aime a genoux?
    D'etre deux? d'etre seuls? et que c'est douce chose
    De se parler d'amour la nuit quand tout repose?
    Oh! laisse-moi dormir et rever sur ton sein,
    Dona Sol! mon amour! ma beaute!

_Bruit de cloches au loin_.

DONA SOL (_se levant effaree_).
    Le tocsin!
    Entends-tu? le tocsin!

HERNANI (_toujours a genoux_).
    Eh non! c'est notre noce
    Qu'on sonne.

_Le bruit de cloches augmente. Cris confus, flambeaux et lumieres a
toutes les fenetres, sur tous les toits, dans toutes les rues_.

DONA SOL.
    Leve-toi! fuis! Grand Dieu! Saragosse
    S'allume!

HERNANI (_se soulevant a demi_).
    Nous aurons une noce aux flambeaux.

DONA SOL.
    C'est la noce des morts! la noce des tombeaux!

_Bruit d'epees. Cris_.

HERNANI (_se recouchant sur le banc de pierre_).
    Rendormons-nous!

UN MONTAGNARD (_L'epee a la main, accourant_).
    Seigneur, les sbires[32], les alcades[33],
    Debouchent dans la place en longues cavalcades!
    Alerte[34], monseigneur!

_Hernani se leve_.

DONA SOL (_pale_).
    Ah! tu l'avais bien dit!

LE MONTAGNARD.
    Au secours!

HERNANI (_au montagnard_).
    Me voici. C'est bien.

CRIS CONFUS (_au dehors_).
    Mort au bandit!

HERNANI (_au montagnard_).
    Ton epee.

_A dona Sol_.
    Adieu donc!

DONA SOL.
    C'est moi qui fais ta perte!
    Ou vas-tu?

_Lui montrant la petite porte_.
    Viens! Fuyons par cette porte ouverte.

HERNANI.
    Dieu! laisser mes amis! que dis-tu?

_Tumulte et cris_.

DONA SOL.
    Ces clameurs
    Me brisent.

_Retenant Hernani_.
    Souviens-toi que si tu meurs, je meurs!

HERNANI (_la tenant embrassee_).
    Un baiser!

DONA SOL.
    Mon epoux! mon Hernani! mon maitre!

HERNANI (_la baisant au front_).
    Helas! c'est le premier.

DONA SOL.
    C'est le dernier peut-etre.

_Il part. Elle tombe sur le banc_.




ACTE TROISIEME - LE VIEILLARD.


LE CHATEAU DE SILVA DANS LES MONTAGNES D'ARAGON.

_La galerie des portraits de la famille de Silva; grande salle, dont
ces portraits, entoures de riches bordures, et surmontes de couronnes
ducales et d'ecussons dores, font la decoration. Au fond une haute
porte gothique. Entre chaque portrait une panoplie complete; toutes
ces armures des siecles differents_.




SCENE PREMIERE.

DONA SOL, _blanche, et debout pres d'une table;_ DON RUY GOMEZ DE
SILVA, _assis dans son grand fauteuil ducal en bois de chene_.


DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Enfin! c'est aujourd'hui! dans une heure on sera
    Ma duchesse! plus d'oncle[1]! et l'on m'embrassera!
    Mais m'as-tu pardonne? J'avais tort, je l'avoue.
    J'ai fait rougir ton front, j'ai fait palir ta joue.
    J'ai soupconne trop vite, et je n'aurais point du
    Te condamner ainsi sans avoir entendu.
    Que l'apparence a tort! Injustes que nous sommes!
    Certe[2], ils etaient bien la, les deux beaux jeunes hommes.
    C'est egal. Je devais n'en pas croire mes yeux.
    Mais que veux-tu, ma pauvre enfant? quand on est vieux!

DONA SOL (_immobile et grave_).
    Vous reparlez toujours de cela. Qui vous blame?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Moi! J'eus tort. Je devais savoir qu'avec ton ame
    On n'a point de galants lorsqu'on est dona Sol,
    Et qu'on a dans le coeur de bon sang espagnol.

DONA SOL.
    Certe, il est bon et pur, monseigneur, et peut-etre
    On le verra bientot[3].

DON RUY GOMEZ (_se levant et allant a elle_).
    Ecoute, on n'est pas maitre
    De soi-meme, amoureux comme je suis de toi,
    Et vieux. On est jaloux, on est mechant, pourquoi?
    Parce que l'on est vieux. Parce que beaute, grace,
    Jeunesse, dans autrui, tout fait peur, tout menace.
    Parce qu'on est jaloux des autres, et honteux
    De soi. Derision! que cet amour boiteux,
    Qui nous remet au coeur tant d'ivresse et de flamme,
    Ait oublie[4] le corps en rajeunissant l'ame!
    --Quand passe un jeune patre--oui, c'en est la[5]!--souvent,
    Tandis que nous allons, lui chantant, moi revant,
    Lui dans son pre vert, moi dans mes noires allees,
    Souvent je dis tout bas:--O mes tours crenelees,
    Mon vieux donjon ducal, que je vous donnerais,
    Oh! que je donnerais mes bles et mes forets,
    Et les vastes troupeaux qui tondent mes collines,
    Mon vieux nom, mon vieux titre, et toutes mes ruines,
    Et tous mes vieux aieux qui bientot m'attendront,
    Pour sa chaumiere neuve et pour son jeune front!
    Car ses cheveux sont noirs, car son oeil reluit comme
    Le tien[6], tu peux le voir, et dire: Ce jeune homme!
    Et puis penser a moi qui suis vieux. Je le sais!
    Pourtant j'ai nom Silva[7], mais ce n'est plus assez!
    Oui, je me dis cela. Vois a quel point je t'aime!
    Le tout, pour etre[8] jeune et beau comme toi-meme!
    Mais a quoi vais-je ici rever? Moi, jeune et beau!
    Qui te dois de si loin devancer au tombeau!

DONA SOL.
    Qui sait?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Mais va, crois-moi, ces cavaliers frivoles
    N'ont pas d'amour si grand qu'il ne s'use en paroles[9].
    Qu'une fille aime et croie un de ces jouvenceaux,
    Elle en meurt, il en rit. Tous ces jeunes oiseaux,
    A l'aile vive et peinte[10], au langoureux ramage,
    Ont un amour qui mue ainsi que leur plumage.
    Les vieux, dont l'age eteint la voix et les couleurs,
    Ont l'aile plus fidele, et, moins beaux, sont meilleurs.
    Nous aimons bien. Nos pas sont lourds? nos yeux arides?
    Nos fronts rides? Au coeur on n'a jamais de rides[11].
    Helas! quand un vieillard aime, il faut l'epargner.
    Le coeur est toujours jeune et peut toujours saigner.
    Oh! mon amour n'est point comme un jouet de verre
    Qui brille et tremble; oh! non, c'est un amour severe,
    Profond, solide, sur, paternel, amical,
    De bois de chene, ainsi que mon fauteuil ducal!
    Voila comme je t'aime, et puis je t'aime encore
    De cent autres facons, comme on aime l'aurore,
    Comme on aime les fleurs, comme on aime les cieux!
    De te voir tous les jours, toi, ton pas gracieux,
    Ton front pur, le beau feu de ta fiere prunelle[12],
    je ris, et j'ai dans l'ame une fete eternelle!

DONA SOL.
    Helas!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Et puis, vois-tu, le monde trouve beau,
    Lorsqu'un homme s'eteint, et lambeau par lambeau
    S'en va, lorsqu'il trebuche au marbre de la tombe,
    Qu'une femme, ange pur, innocente colombe,
    Veille sur lui, l'abrite, et daigne encor[13] souffrir
    L'inutile vieillard qui n'est bon qu'a mourir.
    C'est une oeuvre sacree et qu'a bon droit on loue
    Que[14] ce supreme effort d'un coeur qui se devoue,
    Qui console un mourant jusqu'a la fin du jour,
    Et, sans aimer peut-etre, a des semblants d'amour!
    Ah! tu seras pour moi cet ange au coeur de femme
    Qui du pauvre vieillard rejouit encor[15] l'ame,
    Et de ses derniers ans[16] lui porte la moitie,
    Fille par le respect et soeur par la pitie.

DONA SOL.
    Loin de me preceder, vous pourrez bien me suivre,
    Monseigneur. Ce n'est pas une raison pour vivre
    Que[17] d'etre jeune. Helas! je vous le dis, souvent
    Les vieillards sont tardifs, les jeunes vont devant,
    Et leurs yeux brusquement referment leur paupiere,
    Comme un sepulcre ouvert dont retombe la pierre.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Oh! les sombres discours! Mais je vous gronderai,
    Enfant! un pareil jour est joyeux et sacre.
    Comment, a ce propos[18], quand l'heure nous appelle,
    N'etes-vous pas encor prete pour la chapelle?
    Mais, vite! habillez-vous. Je compte les instants.
    La parure de noce!

DONA SOL.
    Il sera toujours temps.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Non pas.

_Entre un page_.
    Que veut Iaquez!

LE PAGE.
    Monseigneur, a la porte
    Un homme, un pelerin, un mendiant, n'importe,
    Est la qui vous demande asile.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Quel qu'il soit,
    Le bonheur entre avec l'etranger qu'on recoit.
    Qu'il vienne.--Du dehors a-t-on quelques nouvelles?
    Que dit-on de ce chef de bandits infideles
    Qui remplit nos forets de sa rebellion?

LE PAGE.
    C'en est fait d'Hernani[19], c'en est fait du lion
    De la montagne.

DONA SOL (_a part_).
    Dieu!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Quoi!

LE PAGE.
    La bande est detruite.
    Le roi, dit-on, s'est mis lui-meme a leur poursuite.
    La tete d'Hernani vaut mille ecus du roi[20]
    Pour l'instant[21]; mais on dit qu'il est mort.

DONA SOL (_a part_).
    Quoi! sans moi,
    Hernani!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Grace au ciel! il est mort, le rebelle!
    On peut se rejouir maintenant, chere belle.
    Allez donc vous parer, mon amour, mon orgueil!
    Aujourd'hui, double fete!

DONA SOL (_a part_).
    Oh! des habits de deuil!

_Elle sort_.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_au page_).
    Fais-lui vite porter l'ecrin que je lui donne.

_Il se rassied dans son fauteuil_.
    Je veux la voir paree ainsi qu'une madone,
    Et, grace a ses doux yeux, et grace a mon ecrin,
    Belle a faire a genoux tomber un pelerin.
    A propos, et celui qui nous demande un gite?
    Dis-lui d'entrer, fais-lui nos excuses, cours vite.

_Le page salue et sort_.
    Laisser son hote attendre! ah! c'est mal!

_La porte du fond s'ouvre. Parait Hernani deguise en pelerin. Le duc
se leve et va a sa rencontre_.




SCENE II.

DON RUY GOMEZ, HERNANI.


_Hernani s'arrete sur le seuil de la porte_.

HERNANI.
    Monseigneur,
    Paix et bonheur a vous[22]!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_le saluant de la main_).
    A toi paix et bonheur,
    Mon hote!

_Hernani entre. Le duc se rassied_.
    N'es-tu pas pelerin?

HERNANI (_s'inclinant_).
    Oui.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Sans doute
    Tu viens d'Armillas[23]?

HERNANI.
    Non. J'ai pris une autre route;
    On se battait par la.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    La troupe du banni,
    N'est-ce pas?

HERNANI.
    Je ne sais.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Le chef, le Hernani,
    Que devient-il? sais-tu?

HERNANI.
    Seigneur, quel est cet homme?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Tu ne le connais pas? tant pis! la grosse somme
    Ne sera point pour toi. Vois-tu, ce Hernani.
    C'est un rebelle au roi, trop longtemps impuni.
    Si tu vas a Madrid, tu le pourras voir pendre[24].

HERNANI.
    je n'y vais pas.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Sa tete est a qui veut la prendre.

HERNANI (_a part_).
    Qu'on y vienne!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Ou vas-tu, bon pelerin?

HERNANI.
    Seigneur,
    Je vais a Saragosse.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Un voeu fait en l'honneur
    D'un saint? de Notre-Dame?

HERNANI.
    Oui, duc, de Notre-Dame.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Del Pilar?

HERNANI.
    Del Pilar[25].

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Il faut n'avoir point d'ame
    Pour ne point acquitter les voeux qu'on fait aux saints.
    Mais, le tien accompli, n'as-tu d'autres desseins?
    Voir le Pilier, c'est la tout ce que tu desires?

HERNANI.
    Oui, je veux voir bruler les flambeaux et les cires,
    Voir Notre-Dame, au fond du sombre corridor[26],
    Luire en sa chasse ardente[27] avec sa chape[28] d'or,
    Et puis m'en retourner.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Fort bien.--Ton nom, mon frere?
    Je suis Ruy de Silva.

HERNANI (_hesitant_).
    Mon nom?...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Tu peux le taire
    Si tu veux. Nul n'a droit de le savoir ici.
    Viens-tu pas demander asile?

HERNANI.
    Oui, duc.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Merci!
    Sois le bienvenu. Reste, ami, ne te fais faute
    De rien[29]. Quant a ton nom, tu te nommes mon hote.
    Qui que tu sois, c'est bien! et, sans etre inquiet,
    J'accueillerais Satan, si Dieu me l'envoyait.

_La porte du fond s'ouvre a deux battants. Entre dona Sol, en parure
de mariee. Derriere elle, pages, valets, et deux femmes portant sur un
coussin de velours un coffret d'argent cisele, qu'elles vont deposer
sur une table, et qui renferme un riche ecrin, couronne de duchesse,
bracelets, colliers, perles et brillants pele-mele.--Hernani, haletant
et effare, considere dona Sol avec des yeux ardents, sans ecouter le
duc_.




SCENE III.

LES MEMES, DONA SOL, PAGES, VALETS, FEMMES.


DON RUY GOMEZ (_continuant_).
    Voici ma Notre-Dame a moi. L'avoir priee
    Te portera bonheur[30].

_Il va presenter la main a dona Sol, toujours pale et grave_.
    Ma belle mariee,
    Venez.--Quoi! pas d'anneau! pas de couronne encor!

HERNANI (_d'une voix tonnante_).
    Qui veut gagner ici mille carolus d'or[31]?

_Tous se retournent etonnes. Il dechire sa robe de pelerin, la foule
aux pieds, et en sort dans son costume de montagnard_.
    Je suis Hernani.

DONA SOL (_a part, avec joie_).
    Ciel! vivant!

HERNANI (_aux valets_).
    Je suis cet homme
    Qu'on cherche.

_Au duc_.
    Vous vouliez savoir si je me nomme
    Perez ou Diego[32]?--Non, je me nomme Hernani.
    C'est un bien plus beau nom, c'est un nom de banni,
    C'est un nom de proscrit! Vous voyez cette tete?
    Elle vaut assez d'or pour payer votre fete.

_Aux valets_.
    Je vous la donne a tous. Vous serez bien payes!
    Prenez! liez mes mains, liez mes pieds, liez!
    Mais non, c'est inutile, une chaine me lie
    Que je ne romprai point?

DONA SOL (_a part_).
    Malheureuse!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Folie!
    Ca, mon hote est un fou!

HERNANI.
    Votre hote est un bandit.

DONA SOL.
    Oh! ne l'ecoutez pas.

HERNANI.
    J'ai dit ce que j'ai dit.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Mille carolus d'or! monsieur, la somme est forte,
    Et je ne suis pas sur de tous mes gens.

HERNANI.
    Qu'importe!
    Tant mieux si dans le nombre il s'en trouve un qui veut.

_Aux valets_.
    Livrez-moi! vendez-moi!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_s'efforcant de le faire taire_).
    Taisez-vous donc! on peut
    Vous prendre au mot.

HERNANI.
    Amis, l'occasion est belle!
    Je vous dis que je suis le proscrit, le rebelle,
    Hernani!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Taisez-vous!

HERNANI.
    Hernani!

DONA SOL (_d'une voix eteinte, a son oreille_).
    Ho! tais-toi!

HERNANI (_se detournant a demi vers dona Sol_).
    On se marie ici! Je veux en etre, moi!
    Mon epousee aussi m'attend.

_Au duc_.
    Elle est moins belle
    Que la votre, seigneur, mais n'est pas moins fidele.
    C'est la mort!

_Aux valets_.
    Nul de vous ne fait un pas encor?

DONA SOL (_bas_).
    Par pitie!

HERNANI (_aux valets_).
    Hernani! mille carolus d'or!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    C'est le demon!

HERNANI (_a un jeune valet_).
    Viens, toi; tu gagneras la somme.
    Riche alors, de valet tu redeviendras homme.

_Aux valets gui restent immobiles_.
    Vous aussi, vous tremblez!	Ai-je assez de malheur!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Frere, a toucher ta tete, ils risqueraient la leur.
    Fusses-tu Hernani, fusses-tu cent fois pire,
    Pour ta vie au lieu d'or offrit-on un empire,
    Mon hote, je te dois proteger en ce lieu,
    Meme contre le roi, car je te tiens de Dieu.
    S'il tombe un seul cheveu de ton front, que je meure!

_A dona Sol_.
    Ma niece, vous serez ma femme dans une heure;
    Rentrez chez vous. Je vais faire armer le chateau[33],
    J'en vais fermer la porte.

_Il sort. Les valets le suivent_.

HERNANI (_regardant avec desespoir sa ceinture degarnie et desarmee_).
    Oh! pas meme un couteau!

_Dona Sol, apres que le duc a disparu, fait quelques pas comme pour
suivre ses femmes, puis s'arrete, et, des qu'elles sont sorties,
revient vers Hernani avec anxiete_.




SCENE IV.

HERNANI, DONA SOL.

_Hernani considere avec un regard froid et comme inattentif l'ecrin
nuptial place sur la table; puis il hoche la tete, et ses yeux
s'allument_.

HERNANI.
    Je vous fais compliment! Plus que je ne puis dire
    La parure me charme et m'enchante, et j'admire!

_Il s'approche de l'ecrin_.
    La bague est de bon gout,--la couronne me plait,
    Le collier est d'un beau travail,--le bracelet
    Est rare,--mais cent fois, cent fois moins[34] que la femme
    Qui sous un front si pur cache ce coeur infame!

_Examinant de nouveau le coffret_.
    Et qu'avez-vous donne pour tout cela?--Fort bien!
    Un peu de votre amour? mais, vraiment, c'est pour rien!
    Grand Dieu! trahir ainsi! n'avoir pas honte, et vivre!

_Examinant l'ecrin_.
    Mais peut-etre apres tout c'est perle fausse et cuivre
    Au lieu d'or, verre et plomb, diamants deloyaux,
    Faux saphirs, faux bijoux, faux brillants, faux joyaux!
    Ah! s'il en est ainsi, comme cette parure,
    Ton coeur est faux, duchesse, et tu n'es que dorure!

_Il revient au coffret_.
    --Mais non, non. Tout est vrai, tout est bon, tout est beau!
    Il n'oserait tromper, lui qui touche au tombeau.
    Rien n'y manque.

_Il prend l'une apres l'autre toutes les pieces de l'ecrin_.
    Colliers, brillants, pendants d'oreille
    Couronne de duchesse, anneau d'or...--A merveille!
    Grand merci de l'amour sur, fidele et profond[35]!
    Le precieux ecrin!

DONA SOL (_Elle va au coffret, y fouille, et en tire un poignard_).
    Vous n'allez pas au fond!
    --C'est le poignard qu'avec l'aide de ma patronne[36]
    Je pris au roi Carlos, lorsqu'il m'offrit un trone,
    Et que je refusai, pour vous qui m'outragez[37]!

HERNANI (_tombant a ses pieds_).
    Oh! laisse qu'a genoux dans tes yeux affliges
    J'efface tous ces pleurs amers et pleins de charmes,
    Et tu prendras apres tout mon sang pour tes larmes!

DONA SOL (_attendrie_).
    Hernani! je vous aime et vous pardonne, et n'ai
    Que de l'amour pour vous.

HERNANI.
    Elle m'a pardonne,
    Et m'aime! Qui pourra faire aussi que moi-meme,
    Apres ce que j'ai dit, je me pardonne et m'aime?
    Oh! je voudrais savoir, ange au ciel reserve,
    Ou vous avez marche, pour baiser le pave!

DONA SOL.
    Ami!

HERNANI.
    Non, je dois t'etre odieux! Mais, ecoute,
    Dis-moi: Je t'aime! Helas! rassure un coeur qui doute,
    Dis-le-moi! car souvent avec ce peu de mots
    La bouche d'une femme a gueri bien des maux.

DONA SOL (_absorbee et sans l'entendre_).
    Croire que mon amour[38] eut si peu de memoire!
    Que jamais ils pourraient, tous ces hommes sans gloire
    Jusqu'a d'autres amours, plus nobles a leur gre,
    Rapetisser un coeur ou son nom est entre!

HERNANI.
    Helas! j'ai blaspheme! Si j'etais a ta place,
    Dona Sol, j'en aurais assez, je serais lasse
    De ce fou furieux, de ce sombre insense[39]
    Qui ne sait caresser qu'apres qu'il a blesse,
    Je lui dirais: Va-t'en!--Repousse-moi! repousse!
    Et je te benirai, car tu fus bonne et douce,
    Car tu m'as supporte trop longtemps, car je suis
    Mauvais, je noircirais tes jours avec mes nuits,
    Car c'en est trop enfin, ton ame est belle et haute
    Et pure, et si je suis mechant, est-ce ta faute?
    Epouse le vieux duc! il est bon, noble, il a
    Par sa mere Olmedo[40], par son pere Alcala[41].
    Encore un coup[42], sois riche avec lui, sois heureuse!
    Moi, sais-tu ce que peut cette main genereuse
    T'offrir de magnifique? une dot de douleurs.
    Tu pourras y choisir ou du sang ou des pleurs.
    L'exil, les fers, la mort, l'effroi qui m'environne,
    C'est la ton collier d'or, c'est ta belle couronne,
    Et jamais a l'epouse un epoux plein d'orgueil
    N'offrit plus riche ecrin de misere et de deuil.
    Epouse le vieillard, te dis-je; il te merite!
    Eh! qui jamais croira que ma tete proscrite
    Aille avec ton front pur? qui, nous voyant tous deux,
    Toi calme et belle, moi violent, hasardeux,
    Toi paisible et croissant comme une fleur a l'ombre,
    Moi heurte dans l'orage a des ecueils sans nombre,
    Qui dira que nos sorts suivent la meme loi?
    Non. Dieu qui fait tout bien ne te fit pas pour moi.
    Je n'ai nul droit d'en haut sur toi, je me resigne.
    J'ai ton coeur, c'est un vol! je le rends au plus digne.
    Jamais a nos amours le ciel n'a consenti.
    Si j'ai dit que c'etait ton destin, j'ai menti.
    D'ailleurs, vengeance, amour, adieu! mon jour s'acheve.
    Je m'en vais, inutile, avec mon double reve,
    Honteux de n'avoir pu ni punir ni charmer,
    Qu'on m'ait fait pour hair[43], moi qui n'ai su qu'aimer!
    Pardonne-moi! fuis-moi! ce sont mes deux prieres;
    Ne les rejette pas, car ce sont les dernieres.
    Tu vis et je suis mort. Je ne vois pas pourquoi
    Tu te ferais murer dans ma tombe avec moi.

DONA SOL.
    Ingrat!

HERNANI.
    Monts d'Aragon! Galice! Estramadoure[44]!
    --Oh! je porte malheur a tout ce qui m'entoure!
    J'ai pris vos meilleurs fils, pour mes droits sans remords
    Je les ai fait combattre, et voila qu'ils sont morts!
    C'etaient les plus vaillants de la vaillante Espagne.
    Ils sont morts! ils sont tous tombes dans la montagne,
    Tous sur le dos couches, en braves, devant Dieu,
    Et, si leurs yeux s'ouvraient, ils verraient le ciel bleu!
    Voila ce que je fais de tout ce qui m'epouse!
    Est-ce une destinee a te rendre jalouse?
    Dona Sol, prends le duc, prends l'enfer, prends le roi!
    C'est bien. Tout ce qui n'est pas moi vaut mieux que moi!
    Je n'ai plus un ami qui de moi se souvienne,
    Tout me quitte, il est temps qu'a la fin ton tour vienne,
    Car je dois etre seul. Fuis ma contagion.
    Ne te fais pas d'aimer une religion[45]!
    Ah! par pitie pour toi, fuis!--Tu me crois peut-etre
    Un homme comme sont tous les autres, un etre
    Intelligent, qui court droit au but qu'il reva.
    Detrompe-toi. Je suis une force qui va!
    Agent aveugle et sourd de mysteres funebres!
    Une ame de malheur faite avec des tenebres!
    Ou vais-je? Je ne sais. Mais je me sens pousse
    D'un souffle impetueux, d'un destin insense.
    Je descends, je descends, et jamais ne m'arrete.
    Si parfois, haletant, j'ose tourner la tete,
    Une voix me dit: Marche! et l'abime est profond,
    Et de flamme ou de sang je le vois rouge au fond!
    Cependant, a l'entour de ma course farouche,
    Tout se brise, tout meurt. Malheur a qui me touche!
    Oh! fuis! detourne-toi de mon chemin fatal,
    Helas! sans le vouloir, je te ferais du mal!

DONA SOL.
    Grand Dieu!

HERNANI.
    C'est un demon redoutable, te dis-je,
    Que le mien[46]. Mon bonheur, voila le seul prodige
    Qui lui soit impossible. Et toi, c'est le bonheur!
    Tu n'es donc pas pour moi, cherche un autre seigneur!
    Va, si jamais le ciel a mon sort qu'il renie
    Souriait... n'y crois pas! ce serait ironie!
    Epouse le duc!

DONA SOL.
    Donc, ce n'etait pas assez!
    Vous aviez dechire mon coeur, vous le brisez!
    Ah! vous ne m'aimez plus!

HERNANI.
    Oh! mon coeur et mon ame,
    C'est toi, l'ardent foyer d'ou me vient toute flamme,
    C'est toi! Ne m'en veux pas de fuir[47], etre adore!

DONA SOL.
    Je ne vous en veux pas. Seulement j'en mourrai.

HERNANI.
    Mourir! pour qui? pour moi? Se peut-il que tu meures
    Pour si peu?

DONA SOL (_laissant eclater ses larmes_).
    Voila tout.

_Elle tombe sur un fauteuil_.

HERNANI (_s'asseyant pres d'elle_).
    Oh! tu pleures! tu pleures!
    Et c'est encor ma faute! et qui me punira?
    Car tu pardonneras encor! Qui te dira
    Ce que je souffre au moins, lorsqu'une larme noie
    La flamme de tes yeux dont l'eclair est ma joie!
    Oh! mes amis sont morts[48]! Oh! je suis insense!
    Pardonne. Je voudrais aimer, je ne le sai.
    Helas! j'aime pourtant d'une amour[49] bien profonde!
    --Ne pleure pas! mourons plutot!--Que n'ai-je un monde?
    Je te le donnerais! Je suis bien malheureux!

DONA SOL (_se jetant a son cou_).
    Vous etes mon lion superbe et genereux!
    Je vous aime.

HERNANI.
    Oh! l'amour serait un bien supreme
    Si l'on pouvait mourir de trop aimer!

DONA SOL.
    Je t'aime!
    Monseigneur! je vous aime et je suis toute a vous.

HERNANI (_laissant tomber sa tete sur son epaule_).
    Oh! qu'un coup de poignard de toi me serait doux!

DONA SOL (_suppliante_).
    Ah! ne craignez vous pas que Dieu ne vous punisse
    De parler de la sorte?

HERNANI (_toujours appuye sur son sein_).
    Eh bien! qu'il nous unisse!
    Tu le veux.	Qu'il en soit ainsi[50]!--J'ai resiste.

_Tous deux, dans les bras l'un de l'autre, se regardent avec extase,
sans voir, sans entendre, et comme absorbes dans leur regard. Entre
don Ruy Gomez par la porte du fond. Il regarde et s'arrete comme
petrifie sur le seuil_.




SCENE V.

HERNANI, DONA SOL, DON RUY GOMEZ.


DON RUY GOMEZ (_immobile et croisant les bras sur le seuil de la
porte_).
    Voila donc le paiment de l'hospitalite!

DONA SOL.
    Dieu! le duc!

_Tous deux se retournent comme reveilles en sursaut_.

DON RUY GOMEZ (toujours immobile).
    C'est donc la mon salaire, mon hote?
    --Bon seigneur, va-t'en voir si ta muraille est haute,
    Si la porte est bien close et l'archer dans sa tour,
    De ton chateau pour nous fais et refais le tour,
    Cherche en ton arsenal une armure a ta taille,
    Ressaye a soixante ans ton harnois[51] de bataille!
    Voici la loyaute dont nous pairons ta foi!
    Tu fais cela pour nous, et nous ceci pour toi!
    Saints du ciel! j'ai vecu plus de soixante annees,
    J'ai vu bien des bandits aux ames effrenees,
    J'ai souvent, en tirant ma dague du fourreau,
    Fait lever sur mes pas des gibiers de bourreau[52],
    J'ai vu des assassins, des monnayeurs, des traitres,
    De faux valets a table empoisonnant leur maitres,
    J'en ai vu qui mouraient sans croix et sans pater[53],
    J'ai vu Sforce[54], j'ai vu Borgia[55], je vois Luther[56],
    Mais je n'ai jamais vu perversite si haute
    Qui n'eut craint le tonnerre en trahissant son hote!
    Ce n'est pas de mon temps. Si noire trahison
    Petrifie un vieillard au seuil de sa maison,
    Et fait que le vieux maitre, en attendant qu'il tombe,
    A l'air d'une statue a mettre sur sa tombe.
    Maures et Castillans! quel est cet homme-ci?

_Il leve les yeux et les promene sur les portraits qui entourent la
salle_.
    O vous, tous les Silva qui m'ecoutez ici,
    Pardon si devant vous, pardon si ma colere
    Dit l'hospitalite mauvaise conseillere!

HERNANI (_se levant_).
    Duc...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Tais-toi!

_Il fait lentement trois pas dans la salle et promene de
nouveau ses regards sur les portraits des Silva_.
    Morts sacres! aieux! hommes de fer!
    Qui voyez ce qui vient du ciel et de l'enfer,
    Dites-moi, messeigneurs, dites, quel est cet homme?
    Ce n'est pas Hernani, c'est Judas qu'on le nomme!
    Oh! tachez de parler pour me dire son nom!

_Croisant les bras_.
    Avez-vous de vos jours vu rien de pareil? Non!

HERNANI.
    Seigneur duc...

DON RUY GOMEZ (_toujours aux portraits_).
    Voyez-vous, il veut parler, l'infame!
    Mais, mieux encor que moi, vous lisez dans son ame.
    Oh! ne l'ecoutez pas! C'est un fourbe! Il prevoit
    Que mon bras va sans doute ensanglanter mon toit,
    Que peut-etre mon coeur couve dans ses tempetes
    Quelque vengeance, soeur du festin des sept tetes[57],
    Il vous dira qu'il est proscrit, il vous dira
    Qu'on va dire Silva comme l'on dit Lara,
    Et puis qu'il est mon hote, et puis qu'il est votre hote...
    Mes aieux, mes seigneurs, voyez, est-ce ma faute?
    Jugez entre nous deux!

HERNANI.
    Ruy Gomez de Silva,
    Si jamais vers le ciel noble front s'eleva,
    Si jamais coeur fut grand, si jamais ame haute,
    C'est la votre, seigneur! c'est la tienne, o mon hote!
    Moi qui te parle ici, je suis coupable, et n'ai
    Rien a dire, sinon que je suis bien damne.
    Oui, j'ai voulu te prendre et t'enlever ta femme,
    Oui, j'ai voulu souiller ton lit, oui, c'est infame!
    J'ai du sang. Tu feras tres bien de le verser,
    D'essuyer ton epee et de n'y plus penser!

DONA SOL.
   Seigneur, ce n'est pas lui! Ne frappez que moi-meme!

HERNANI.
    Taisez-vous, dona Sol. Car cette heure est supreme.
    Cette heure m'appartient. Je n'ai plus qu'elle. Ainsi
    Laissez-moi m'expliquer avec le duc ici.
    Duc, crois aux derniers mots de ma bouche; j'en jure[58],
    Je suis coupable, mais sois tranquille,--elle est pure!
    C'est la tout. Moi coupable, elle pure; ta foi
    Pour elle, un coup d'epee ou de poignard pour moi.
    Voila.--Puis fais jeter le cadavre a la porte
    Et laver le plancher, si tu veux, il n'importe!

DONA SOL.
    Ah! moi seule ai tout fait.	Car je l'aime.

_Don Ruy se detourne a ce mot en tressaillant, et fixe sur dona Sol
un regard terrible. Elle se jette a ses genoux_.
    Oui, pardon!
    Je l'aime, monseigneur!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Vous l'aimez!

_A Hernani_.
    Tremble donc!

_Bruit de trompettes au dehors.--Entre le page. Au page_
    Qu'est ce bruit?

LE PAGE.
    C'est le roi, monseigneur, en personne,
    Avec un gros d'archers et son heraut qui sonne.

DONA SOL.
    Dieu! le roi! Dernier coup!

LE PAGE (_au duc_).
    Il demande pourquoi
    La porte est close, et veut qu'on ouvre.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Ouvrez au roi.

_Le page s'incline et sort_.

DONA SOL.
    Il est perdu!

_Don Ruy Gomez va a l'un des tableaux, qui est son propre portrait et
le dernier a gauche; il presse un ressort, le portrait s'ouvre comme
une porte, et laisse voir une cachette pratiquee dans le mur. Il se
tourne vers Hernani_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Monsieur, venez ici.

HERNANI.
    Ma tete
    Est a toi. Livre-la, seigneur. Je la tiens prete.
    Je suis ton prisonnier.

_Il entre dans la cachette. Don Ruy presse de nouveau le ressort,
tout se referme, et le portrait revient a sa place_.

DONA SOL (_au duc_).
    Seigneur, pitie pour lui!

LE PAGE (_entrant_).
    Son altesse le roi.

_Dona Sol baisse precipitamment son voile. La porte s'ouvre a deux
battants. Entre don Carlos en habit de guerre, suivi d'une foule de
gentilshommes egalement armes, de pertuisaniers, d'arquebusiers,
d'arbaletriers_.




SCENE VI.

DON RUY GOMEZ; DONA SOL (_voilee_); DON CARLOS; SUITE.

_Don Carlos s'avance a pas lents, la main gauche sur le pommeau de son
epee, la droite dans sa poitrine, et fixe sur le vieux duc un oeil
de defiance et de colere. Le duc va au devant du roi et le salue
profondement.--Silence.--Attente et terreur alentour. Enfin, le roi,
arrive en face du duc, leve brusquement la tete_.

DON CARLOS.
    D'ou vient donc aujourd'hui,
    Mon cousin, que ta porte est si bien verrouillee?
    Par les saints! je croyais ta dague plus rouillee!
    Et je ne savais pas qu'elle eut hate a ce point,
    Quand nous te venons voir, de reluire a ton poing[59]!

_Don Ruy Gomez veut parler, le roi poursuit avec un geste imperieux_.
    C'est s'y prendre un peu tard[60] pour faire le jeune homme!
    Avons-nous des turbans? serait-ce qu'on me nomme
    Boabdil[61] ou Mahom[62], et non Carlos, repond!
    Pour nous baisser la herse et nous lever le pont?

DON RUY GOMEZ (_s'inclinant_).
    Seigneur...

DON CARLOS (_a ses gentilshommes_).
    Prenez les clefs! saissisez-vous des portes!

_Deux officiers sortent. Plusieurs autres rangent les soldats en
triple haie dans la salle, du roi a la grande porte. Don Carlos se
retourne vers le duc_.
    Ah! vous reveillez donc les rebellions mortes?
    Pardieu! si vous prenez de ces airs avec moi.
    Messieurs les ducs, le roi prendra des airs de roi
    Et j'irai par les monts, de mes mains aguerries,
    Dans leurs nids creneles tuer les seigneuries!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_se redressant_).
    Altesse, les Silva sont loyaux...

DON CARLOS (l'interrompant).
    Sans detours
    Reponds, duc, ou je fais raser tes onze tours!
    De l'incendie eteint il reste une etincelle,
    Des bandits morts il reste un chef.--Qui le recele?
    C'est toi! Ce Hernani, rebelle empoisonneur,
    Ici, dans ton chateau, tu le caches!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Seigneur,
    C'est vrai.

DON CARLOS.
    Fort bien. Je veux sa tete,--ou bien la tienne,
    Entends-tu, mon cousin?

DON RUY GOMEZ (_s'inclinant_).
    Mais qu'a cela ne tienne[63]!
    Vous serez satisfait.

_Dona Sol cache sa tete dans ses mains et tombe sur le fauteuil_.

DON CARLOS (_radouci_).
    Ah! tu t'amendes.--Va
    Chercher mon prisonnier.

_Le duc croise les bras, baisse la tete et reste quelques moments
reveur. Le roi et dona Sol l'observent en silence et agites
d'emotions contraires. Enfin le duc releve son front, va au roi, lui
prend la main, et le mene a pas lents devant le plus ancien des
portraits, celui qui commence la galerie a droite_.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_montrant au roi le vieux portrait_).
    Celui-ci, des Silva
    C'est l'aine, c'est l'aieul, l'ancetre, le grand homme!
    Don Silvius[64], qui fut trois fois consul de Rome.

_Passant au portrait suivant_.
    Voici don Galceran de Silva, l'autre Cid!
    On lui garde a Toro[65], pres de Valladolid[66],
    Une chasse doree ou brulent mille cierges.
    Il affranchit Leon du tribut des cent vierges[67].

_Passant a un autre_.
    --Don Blas,--qui, de lui-meme et dans sa bonne foi,
    S'exila pour avoir mal conseille le roi.

_A un autre_.
    --Christoval.--Au combat d'Escalona, don Sanche,
    Le roi, fuyait a pied, et sur sa plume blanche
    Tous les coups s'acharnaient; il cria: Christoval!
    Christoval prit la plume et donna son cheval.

_A un autre_.
    --Don Jorge, qui paya la rancon de Ramire[68],
    Roi d'Aragon.

DON CARLOS (_croisant les bras et le regardant de la tete aux pieds_).
    Pardieu! don Ruy, je vous admire!
    Continuez!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_passant a un autre_).
    Voici Ruy Gomez de Silva,
    Grand-maitre de Saint-Jacque et de Calatrava[69].
    Son armure geante irait mal a nos tailles.
    Il prit trois cents drapeaux, gagna trente batailles,
    Conquit au roi Motril[70], Antequera[71], Suez[72],
    Nijar[73], et mourut pauvre.--Altesse, saluez.

_Il s'incline, se decouvre, et passe a un autre. Le roi l'ecoute
avec une impatience et une colere toujours croissantes_.
    Pres de lui, Gil son fils, cher aux ames loyales.
    Sa main pour un serment valait les mains royales.

_A un autre_.
    --Don Gaspard, de Mendoce et de Silva l'honneur!
    Toute noble maison tient a Silva[74], seigneur.
    Sandoval tour a tour nous craint ou nous epouse,
    Manrique nous envie et Lara nous jalouse.
    Alencastre[75] nous hait. Nous touchons a la fois
    Du pied a tous les ducs, du front a tous les rois!

DON CARLOS.
    Vous raillez-vous?

DON RUY GOMEZ (_allant a d'autres portraits_).
    Voila don Vasquez, dit le Sage,
    Don Jayme, dit le Fort. Un jour, sur son passage,
    Il arreta Zamet[76] et cent maures tout seul.
    --J'en passe, et des meilleurs.

_Sur un geste de colere du roi, il passe un grand nombre de tableaux,
et vient tout de suite aux trois derniers portraits a gauche du
spectateur_.
    Voici mon noble aieul.
    Il vecut soixante ans, gardant la foi juree,
    Meme aux juifs.

_A l'avant-dernier_.
    Ce vieillard, cette tete sacree,
    C'est mon pere. Il fut grand, quoi qu'il vint le dernier.
    Les maures de Grenade avaient fait prisonnier
    Le comte Alvar Giron, son ami. Mais mon pere
    Prit pour l'aller chercher six cents hommes de guerre;
    Il fit tailler en pierre un comte Alvar Giron
    Qu'a sa suite il traina, jurant par son patron
    De ne point reculer que le comte de pierre
    Ne tournat front lui-meme et n'allat en arriere.
    Il combattit, puis vint au comte, et le sauva.

DON CARLOS
    Mon prisonnier!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    C'etait un Gomez de Silva.
    Voila donc ce qu'on dit quand dans cette demeure
    On voit tous ces heros...

DON CARLOS.
    Mon prisonnier sur l'heure!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_Il s'incline profondement devant le roi, lui prend la
main et le mene devant le dernier portrait, celui qui sert de porte a
la cachette ou il a fait entrer Hernani. Dona Sol le suit des yeux
avec anxiete.--Attente et silence dans l'assistance_.
    Ce portrait, c'est le mien.--Roi don Carlos, merci!
    Car vous voulez qu'on dise en le voyant ici:
    "Ce dernier, digne fils d'une race si haute,
    Fut un traitre, et vendit la tete de son hote!"

_Joie de dora Sol. Mouvement de stupeur dans les assistants. Le roi,
deconcerte, s'eloigne avec colere. Puis reste quelques instants
silencieux, les levres tremblantes et l'oeil enflamme_.

DON CARLOS.
    Duc, ton chateau me gene et je le mettrai bas!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Car vous me la pairiez[77], altesse, n'est-ce pas?

DON CARLOS.
    Duc, j'en ferai raser les tours pour tant d'audace,
    Et je ferai semer du chanvre sur la place.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Mieux voir croitre du chanvre ou ma tour s'eleva
    Qu'une tache ronger le vieux nom de Silva.

_Aux portraits_.
   N'est-il pas vrai, vous tous?

DON CARLOS.
    Duc, cette tete est notre[78],
    Et tu m'avais promis...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    J'ai promis l'une ou l'autre,

_Aux portraits_.
    N'est-il pas vrai, vous tous?

_Montrant sa tete_.
    Je donne celle-ci.

_Au roi_.
    Prenez-la.

DON CARLOS.
    Duc, fort bien. Mais j'y perds, grand merci[79]!
    La tete qu'il me faut est jeune, il faut que morte
    On la prenne aux cheveux. La tienne? que m'importe!
    Le bourreau la prendrait par les cheveux en vain.
    Tu n'en as pas assez pour lui remplir la main!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Altesse, pas d'affront! ma tete encore est belle,
    Et vaut bien, que je crois, la tete d'un rebelle.
    La tete d'un Silva, vous etes degoute!

DON CARLOS.
    Livre-nous Hernani!

DON Ruy GOMEZ.
    Seigneur, en verite,
    J'ai dit.

DON CARLOS (_a sa suite_).
    Fouillez partout! et qu'il ne soit point d'aile,
    De cave ni de tour...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Mon donjon est fidele
    Comme moi. Seul il sait le secret avec moi.
    Nous le garderons bien tous deux.

DON CARLOS.
    Je suis le roi!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Hors que de mon chateau demoli pierre a pierre
    On ne fasse ma tombe, on n'aura rien.

DON CARLOS.
    Priere,
    Menace, tout est vain!--Livre-moi le bandit,
    Duc! ou tete et chateau, j'abattrai tout.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    J'ai dit.

DON CARLOS.
    Eh bien donc! au lieu d'une alors j'aurai deux tetes.

_Au duc d'Alcala_[80].
    Jorge, arretez le duc.

DONA SOL (_arrachant son voile et se jetant entre le roi, le duc, et
les gardes_).
    Roi don Carlos, vous etes
    Un mauvais roi!

DON CARLOS.
    Grand Dieu! Que vois-je? dona Sol!

DONA SOL.
    Altesse, tu n'as pas le coeur d'un Espagnol!

DON CARLOS (_trouble_).
    Madame, pour le roi vous etes bien severe.

_Il s'approche de dona Sol. Bas_.
    C'est vous qui m'avez mis au coeur cette colere.
    Un homme devient ange ou monstre en vous touchant.
    Ah! quand on est hai, que vite[81] on est mechant!
    Si vous aviez voulu, peut-etre, o jeune fille,
    J'etais grand, j'eusse ete le lion de Castille!
    Vous m'en faites le tigre avec votre courroux.
    Le voila qui rugit, madame, taisez-vous!

_Dona Sol lui jette un regard. Il s'incline_.
    Pourtant, j'obeirai.

_Se tournant vers le duc_.
    Mon cousin, je t'estime.
    Ton scrupule apres tout peut sembler legitime.
    Sois fidele a ton hote, infidele a ton roi,
    C'est bien, je te fais grace et suis meilleur que toi.
    --J'emmene seulement ta niece comme otage.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Seulement!

DONA SOL (_interdite_).
    Moi, seigneur!

DON CARLOS.
    Oui, vous.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Pas davantage!
    O la grande clemence! o genereux vainqueur,
    Qui menage la tete et torture le coeur!
    Belle grace!

DON CARLOS.
    Choisis. Dona Sol ou le traitre.
    Il me faut l'un des deux.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Ah! vous etes le maitre!

_Don Carlos s'approche de dona Sol pour l'emmener. Elle se
refugie vers don Ruy Gomez_.

DONA SOL.
    Sauvez-moi, monseigneur!

_Elle s'arrete.--A part_.
    Malheureuse, il le faut!
    La tete de mon oncle ou l'autre!... Moi plutot!

_Au roi_.
    Je vous suis.

DON CARLOS (_a part_).
    Par les saints! l'idee est triomphante!
    Il faudra bien enfin s'adoucir, mon infante[82]!

_Dona Sol va d'un pas grave et assure au coffret qui renferme l'ecrin,
l'ouvre et y prend le poignard, qu'elle cache dans son sein. Don
Carlos vient a elle et lui presente la main_.

DON CARLOS (_a dona Sol_).
    Qu'emportez-vous la?

DONA SOL.
    Rien.

DON CARLOS.
    Un joyau precieux?

DONA SOL.
    Oui.

DON CARLOS (_souriant_).
    Voyons.

DONA SOL.
    Vous verrez.

_Elle lui donne la main et se dispose a le suivre. Don Ruy Gomez, qui
est reste immobile et profondement absorbe dans sa pensee, se
retourne et fait quelques pas en criant_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Dona Sol! terre et cieux!
    Dona Sol!--Puisque l'homme ici n'a point d'entrailles,
    A mon aide! croulez, armures et murailles!

_Il court au roi_.
    Laisse-moi mon enfant! je n'ai qu'elle, o mon roi!

DON CARLOS (lachant la main de dona Sol).
    Alors, mon prisonnier!

_Le duc baisse la tete et semble en proie a une horrible hesitation;
puis il se releve, et regarde les portraits en joignant les mains
vers eux_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Ayez pitie de moi,
    Vous tous!

_Il fait un pas vers la cachette; dona Sol le suit des yeux avec
anxiete. Il se retourne vers les portraits_.
    Oh! voilez-vous! votre regard m'arrete.

_Il s'avance en chancelant jusqu'a son portrait, puis se retourne
encore vers le roi_.
    Tu le veux?

DON CARLOS.
    Oui.

_Le duc leve en tremblant la main vers le ressort_.

DONA SOL.
    Dieu!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Non!

_Il se jette aux genoux du roi_.
    Par pitie, prends ma tete!

DON CARLOS.
    Ta niece!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_se relevant_).
    Prends-la donc! et laisse-moi l'honneur!

DON CARLOS (_saisissant la main de dona Sol tremblante_).
    Adieu, duc.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Au revoir!

_Il suit de l'oeil le roi, qui se retire lentement avec dona Sol; puis
il met la main sur son poignard_.
    Dieu vous garde, seigneur!

_Il revient sur le devant, haletant, immobile, sans plus rien voir
ni entendre, l'oeil fixe, les bras croises sur sa poitrine, qui les
souleve comme par des mouvements convulsifs. Cependant le roi sort
avec dona Sol, et toute la suite des seigneurs sort apres lui, deux
a deux, gravement et chacun a son rang. Ils se parlent a voix basse
entre eux_.

DON RUY GOMEZ (a part).
    Roi, pendant que tu sors joyeux de ma demeure,
    Ma vieille loyaute sort de mon coeur qui pleure.

_Il leve les yeux, les promene autour de lui, et voit qu'il est seul.
Il court a la muraille, detache deux epees d'une panoplie, les mesure
toutes deux, puis les depose sur une table. Cela fait, il va au
portrait, pousse le ressort, la porte cachee se rouvre_.




SCENE VII.

DON RUY GOMEZ, HERNANI.


DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Sors.

_Hernani parait a la porte de la cachette. Don Ruy lui montre les deux
epees sur la table_.
    Choisis.--Don Carlos est hors de la maison.
    Il s'agit maintenant de me rendre raison.
    Choisis. Et faisons vite.--Allons donc! ta main tremble!

HERNANI.
    Un duel! Nous ne pouvons, vieillard, combattre ensemble.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Pourquoi donc? As-tu peur? N'est-tu point noble?
    Enfer!
    Noble ou non, pour croiser le fer avec le fer,
    Tout homme qui m'outrage est assez gentilhomme!

HERNANI.
    Vieillard...

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Viens me tuer ou viens mourir, jeune homme.

HERNANI.
    Mourir, oui. Vous m'avez sauve malgre mes voeux[83].
    Donc, ma vie est a vous. Reprenez-la.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Tu veux?

_Aux portraits_.
    Vous voyez qu'il le veut.

_A Hernani_.
    C'est bon. Fais ta priere.

HERNANI.
    Oh! c'est a toi, seigneur, que je fais la derniere.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Parle a l'autre Seigneur.

HERNANI.
    Non, non, a toi! Vieillard,
    Frappe-moi. Tout m'est bon, dague, epee ou poignard.
    Mais fais-moi, par pitie, cette supreme joie!
    Duc, avant de mourir, permets que je la voie!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    La voir!

HERNANI.
    Au moins permets que j'entende sa voix
    Une derniere fois! rien qu'une seule fois!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    L'entendre!

HERNANI.
    Oh! je comprends, seigneur, ta jalousie.
    Mais deja par la mort ma jeunesse est saisie,
    Pardonne-moi. Veux-tu, dis-moi, que, sans la voir,
    S'il le faut, je l'entende? et je mourrai ce soir.
    L'entendre seulement! contente[84] mon envie!
    Mais, oh! qu'avec douceur j'exhalerais ma vie,
    Si tu daignais vouloir qu'avant de fuir aux cieux
    Mon ame allat revoir la sienne dans ses yeux!
    --Je ne lui dirai rien. Tu seras la, mon pere.
    Tu me prendras apres.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_montrant la cachette encore ouverte_).
    Saints du ciel! ce repaire
    Est-il donc si profond, si sourd et si perdu,
    Qu'il n'ait entendu rien?

HERNANI.
    Je n'ai rien entendu.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Il a fallu livrer dona Sol ou toi-meme.

HERNANI.
    A qui, livree?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Au roi.

HERNANI.
    Vieillard stupide! il l'aime.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Il l'aime!

HERNANI.
    Il nous l'enleve! il est notre rival!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    O malediction!--Mes vassaux! A cheval!
    A cheval! poursuivons le ravisseur!

HERNANI.
    Ecoute.
    La vengeance au pied sur fait moins de bruit en route.
    Je t'appartiens. Tu peux me tuer. Mais veux-tu
    M'employer a venger ta niece et sa vertu?
    Ma part dans ta vengeance! oh! fais-moi cette grace.
    Et, s'il faut embrasser tes pieds, je les embrasse!
    Suivons le roi tous deux. Viens, je serai ton bras,
    Je te vengerai, duc. Apres, tu me tueras.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Alors, comme aujourd'hui, te laisseras-tu faire[85]?

HERNANI.
    Oui, duc.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Qu'en jures-tu?

HERNANI.
    La tete de mon pere.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Voudras-tu de toi-meme un jour t'en souvenir?

HERNANI (_lui presentant le cor qu'il detache de sa ceinture_).
    Ecoute. Prends ce cor.--Quoi qu'il puisse advenir,
    Quand tu voudras, seigneur, quel que soit le lieu, l'heure,
    S'il te passe a l'esprit qu'il est temps que je meure,
    Viens, sonne de ce cor[86], et ne prends d'autres soins.
    Tout sera fait.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_lui tendant la main_).
    Ta main.

_Ils se serrent la main.--Aux portraits_.
    Vous tous, soyez temoins!




ACTE QUATRIEME - LE TOMBEAU.


AIX-LA-CHAPELLE.

_Les caveaux qui renferment le tombeau de Charlemagne a
Aix-la-Chapelle[1]. De grandes voutes d'architecture lombarde. Gros
piliers bas, pleins cintres, chapiteaux d'oiseaux et de fleurs.--A
droite, le tombeau de Charlemagne, avec une petite porte de bronze,
basse et cintree. Une seule lampe suspendue a une clef de voute en
eclaire l'inscription: KAROLVS MAGNVS.--Il est nuit. On ne voit pas
le fond du souterrain; l'ail se perd dans les arcades, les escaliers
et les piliers qui s'entre croisent dans l'ombre_.




SCENE PREMIERE.

DON CARLOS, DON RICARDO DE ROXAS, COMTE DE CASAPALMA (_une lanterne
a la main. Grands manteaux, chapeaux rabattus_).


DON RICARDO (_son chapeau a la main_).
    C'est ici.

DON CARLOS.
    C'est ici que la ligue s'assemble!
    Que je vais dans ma main les tenir tous ensemble!
    Ah! monsieur l'electeur de Treves[2], c'est ici!
    Vous leur pretez ce lieu! Certe, il est bien choisi!
    Un noir complot prospere a l'air des catacombes.
    Il est bon d'aiguiser les stylets sur des tombes.
    Pourtant c'est jouer gros. La tete est de l'enjeu,
    Messieurs les assassins! et nous verrons.--Pardieu!
    Ils font bien de choisir pour une telle affaire
    Un sepulcre,--ils auront moins de chemin a faire.

_A don Ricardo_.
    Ces caveaux sous le sol s'etendent-ils bien loin?

DON RICARDO.
    Jusques au chateau-fort.

DON CARLOS.
    C'est plus qu'il n'est besoin.

DON RICARDO.
    D'autres, de ce cote, vont jusqu'au monastere
    D'Altenheim...

DON CARLOS.
    Ou Rodolphe extermina Lothaire[3].
    Bien.--Une fois encor, comte, redites-moi
    Les noms et les griefs, ou, comment, et pourquoi.

DON RICARDO.
    Gotha[4].

DON CARLOS.
    Je sais pourquoi le brave duc conspire.
    Il veut un Allemand d'Allemagne a l'Empire.

DON RICARDO.
    Hohenbourg.

DON CARLOS.
    Hohenbourg aimerait mieux, je croi[5],
    L'enfer avec Francois que le ciel avec moi.

DON RICARDO.
    Don Gil Tellez Giron.

DON CARLOS.
    Castille et Notre-Dame!
    Il se revolte donc contre son roi, l'infame!

DON RICARDO.
    On dit qu'il vous trouva chez madame Giron
    Un soir que vous veniez de le faire baron.
    Il veut venger l'honneur de sa tendre compagne.

DON CARLOS.
    C'est donc qu'il se revolte alors contre l'Espagne.
    --Qui nomme-t-on encore?

DON RICARDO.
    On cite avec ceux-la
    Le reverend Vasquez, eveque d'Avila.

DON CARLOS.
    Est-ce aussi pour venger la vertu de sa femme?

DON RICARDO.
    Puis Guzman de Lara, mecontent, qui reclame
    Le collier de votre ordre.

DON CARLOS.
    Ah! Guzman de Lara!
    Si ce n'est qu'un collier qu'il lui faut, il l'aura.

DON RICARDO.
    Le duc de Lutzelbourg[6]. Quant aux plans qu'on lui prete...

DON CARLOS.
    Le duc de Lutzelbourg est trop grand de la tete[7].

DON RICARDO.
    Juan de Haro, qui veut Astorga[8].

DON CARLOS.
    Ces Haro
    Ont toujours fait doubler la solde du bourreau[9].

DON RICARDO.
    C'est tout.

DON CARLOS.
    Ce ne sont pas toutes mes tetes. Comte,
    Cela ne fait que sept, et je n'ai pas mon compte.

DON RICARDO.
    Ah! je ne nomme pas quelques bandits, gages
    Par Treve ou par la France...

DON CARLOS.
    Hommes sans prejuges
    Dont le poignard, toujours pret a jouer son role,
    Tourne aux plus gros ecus, comme l'aiguille au pole!

DON RICARDO.
    Pourtant j'ai distingue deux hardis compagnons[10],
    Tous deux nouveaux venus. Un jeune, un vieux.

DON CARLOS.
    Leurs noms?

_Don Ricardo leve les epaules en signe d'ignorance_.
    Leur age?

DON RICARDO.
    Le plus jeune a vingt ans.

DON CARLOS.
    C'est dommage.

DON RICARDO.
    Le vieux, soixante au moins.

DON CARLOS.
    L'un n'a pas encor l'age,
    Et l'autre ne l'a plus. Tant pis. J'en prendrai soin.
    Le bourreau peut compter sur mon aide au besoin.
    Ah! loin que mon epee aux factions soit douce,
    Je la lui preterai si sa hache s'emousse,
    Comte, et pour l'elargir[11], je coudrai, s'il le faut,
    Ma pourpre imperiale au drap de l'echafaud.
    --Mais serai-je empereur seulement?

DON RICARDO.
    Le college,
    A cette heure assemble, delibere.

DON CARLOS.
    Que sais-je?
    Ils nommeront Francois premier, ou leur Saxon,
    Leur Frederic le Sage!--Ah! Luther a raison,
    Tout va mal!--Beaux faiseurs de majestes sacrees!
    N'acceptant pour raisons que les raisons dorees!
    Un Saxon heretique[12]! un comte palatin
    Imbecile! un primat de Treves libertin!
    --Quant au roi de Boheme, il est pour moi.--Des princes
    De Hesse[13], plus petits encor que leurs provinces!
    De jeunes idiots! des vieillards debauches!
    Des couronnes, fort bien! mais des tetes? cherchez!
    Des nains! que je pourrais, concile ridicule,
    Dans ma peau de lion emporter comme Hercule[14]!
    Et qui, demaillotes du manteau violet,
    Auraient la tete encor de moins que Triboulet[15]
    --Il me manque trois voix, Ricardo! tout me manque!
    Oh! je donnerais Gand, Tolede et Salamanque[16],
    Mon ami Ricardo, trois villes a leur choix,
    Pour trois voix, s'ils voulaient! Vois-tu, pour ces trois voix,
    Oui, trois de mes cites de Castille ou de Flandre[17],
    Je les donnerais!--sauf, plus tard, a les reprendre[18]!

_Don Ricardo salue profondement le roi, et met son chapeau sur sa
tete_.
    --Vous vous couvrez[19]?

DON RICARDO.
    Seigneur, vous m'avez tutoye.

_Saluant de nouveau_.
    Me voila grand d'Espagne.

DON CARLOS (_a part_).
    Ah! tu me fais pitie,
    Ambitieux de rien!--Engeance interessee!
    Comme a travers la notre ils suivent leur pensee!
    Basse-cour ou le roi, mendie sans pudeur,
    A tous ces affames emiette la grandeur!

_Revant_.
    Dieu seul et l'empereur sont grands!--et le saint-pere!
    Le reste, rois et ducs! qu'est cela?

DON RICARDO.
    Moi, j'espere
    Qu'ils prendront votre altesse.

DON CARLOS (_a part_).
    Altesse! altesse, moi!
    J'ai du malheur en tout.--S'il fallait rester roi!

DON RICARDO (_a part_).
    Baste[20]! empereur ou non, me voila grand d'Espagne.

DON CARLOS.
    Sitot qu'ils auront fait l'empereur d'Allemagne,
    Quel signal a la ville annoncera son nom?

DON RICARDO.
    Si c'est le duc de Saxe, un seul coup de canon.
    Deux, si c'est le Francais. Trois, si c'est votre altesse.

DON CARLOS.
    Et cette dona Sol! Tout m'irrite et me blesse!
    Comte, si je suis fait empereur, par hasard,
    Cours la chercher. Peut-etre on voudra d'un cesar[21]!

DON RICARDO (_souriant_).
    Votre altesse est bien bonne!

DON CARLOS (_l'interrompant avec hauteur_).
    Ah! la-dessus, silence!
    Je n'ai point dit encor ce que je veux qu'on pense.
    --Quand saura-t-on le nom de l'elu?

DON RICARDO.
    Mais, je crois,
    Dans une heure au plus tard.

DON CARLOS.
    Oh! trois voix! rien que trois!
    --Mais ecrasons d'abord ce ramas qui conspire,
    Et nous verrons apres a qui sera l'empire.

_Il compte sur ses doigts et frappe du pied_.
    Toujours trois voix de moins! Ah! ce sont eux qui l'ont!
    --Ce Corneille Agrippa pourtant en sait bien long[22]!
    Dans l'ocean celeste il a vu treize etoiles
    Vers la mienne du nord venir a pleines voiles.
    J'aurai l'empire, allons!--Mais d'autre part on dit
    Que l'abbe Jean Tritheme[23] a Francois l'a predit.
    --J'aurais du, pour mieux voir ma fortune eclaircie,
    Avec quelque armement aider la prophetie!
    Toutes predictions du sorcier le plus fin
    Viennent bien mieux a terme et font meilleure fin
    Quand une bonne armee, avec canons et piques,
    Gens de pied, de cheval, fanfares et musiques,
    Prete a montrer la route au sort qui veut broncher,
    Leur sert de sage-femme et les fait accoucher.
    Lequel vaut mieux, Corneille Agrippa? Jean Tritheme?
    Celui dont une armee explique le systeme,
    Qui met un fer de lance au bout de ce qu'il dit,
    Et compte maint soudard, lansquenet ou bandit,
    Dont l'estoc, refaisant la fortune imparfaite,
    Taille l'evenement au plaisir du prophete.
    --Pauvres fous! qui, l'oeil fier, le front haut, visent droit
    A l'empire du monde et disent: J'ai mon droit!
    Ils ont force canons, ranges en longues files,
    Dont le souffle embrase ferait fondre des villes;
    Ils ont vaisseaux, soldats, chevaux, et vous croyez
    Qu'ils vont marcher au but sur les peuples broyes...
    Baste! au grand carrefour de la fortune humaine,
    Qui mieux encor qu'au trone a l'abime nous mene,
    A peine ils font trois pas, qu'indecis, incertains,
    Tachant en vain de lire au livre des destins,
    Ils hesitent, peu surs d'eux-meme, et dans le doute
    Au necroman du coin vont demander leur route!

_A don Ricardo_.
    --Va-t'en. C'est l'heure ou vont venir les conjures.
    Ah! la clef du tombeau?

DON RICARDO (_remettant une clef au roi_).
    Seigneur, vous songerez
    Au comte de Limbourg[24], gardien capitulaire[25],
    Qui me l'a confiee et fait tout pour vous plaire.

DON CARLOS (_le congediant_).
    Fais tout ce que j'ai dit! tout!

DON RICARDO (_s'inclinant_).
    J'y vais de ce pas,
    Altesse!

DON CARLOS.
    Il faut trois coups de canon, n'est-ce pas?

_Don Ricardo s'incline et sort. Don Carlos, reste seul, tombe dans
une profonde reverie. Ses bras se croisent, sa tete flechit sur sa
poitrine; puis il se releve et se tourne vers le tombeau_.




SCENE II.[26]


DON CARLOS (_seul_).
    Charlemagne, pardon! ces voutes solitaires
    Ne devraient repeter que paroles austeres.
    Tu t'indignes sans doute a ce bourdonnement
    Que nos ambitions font sur ton monument.
    --Charlemagne est ici! Comment, sepulcre sombre,
    Peux-tu sans eclater contenir si grande ombre?
    Es-tu bien la, geant d'un monde createur[27],
    Et t'y peux-tu coucher de toute ta hauteur?
    --Ah! c'est un beau spectacle a ravir la pensee
    Que l'Europe ainsi faite et comme il l'a laissee!
    Un edifice, avec deux hommes au sommet,
    Deux chefs elus auxquels tout roi ne se soumet.
    Presque tous les etats, duches, fiefs militaires,
    Royaumes, marquisats, tous sont hereditaires;
    Mais le peuple a parfois son pape ou son cesar,
    Tout marche, et le hasard corrige le hasard[28].
    De la vient l'equilibre, et toujours l'ordre eclate[29].
    Electeurs de drap d'or, cardinaux d'ecarlate,
    Double senat sacre dont la terre s'emeut,
    Ne sont la qu'en parade, et Dieu veut ce qu'il veut.
    Qu'une idee, au besoin des temps, un jour eclose[30],
    Elle grandit, va, court, se mele a toute chose,
    Se fait homme[31], saisit les coeurs, creuse un sillon;
    Maint roi la foule au pied ou lui met un baillon;
    Mais qu'elle entre un matin a la diete[32], au conclave,
    Et tous les rois soudain verront l'idee esclave,
    Sur leurs tetes de rois que ses pieds courberont,
    Surgir, le globe en main ou la tiare au front[33].
    Le pape et l'empereur sont tout. Rien n'est sur terre
    Que pour eux et par eux. Un supreme mystere
    Vit en eux, et le ciel, dont ils ont tous les droits,
    Leur fait un grand festin des peuples et des rois,
    Et les tient sous sa nue, ou son tonnerre gronde,
    Seuls, assis a la table ou Dieu leur sert le monde.
    Tete a tete ils sont la, reglant et retranchant,
    Arrangeant l'univers comme un faucheur son champ.
    Tout se passe entre eux deux. Les rois sont a la porte,
    Respirant la vapeur des mets que l'on apporte,
    Regardant a la vitre, attentifs, ennuyes,
    Et se haussant, pour voir, sur la pointe des pieds.
    Le monde au-dessous d'eux s'echelonne et se groupe.
    Ils font et defont. L'un delie et l'autre coupe.
    L'un est la verite, l'autre est la force. Ils ont
    Leur raison en eux-meme, et sont parce qu'ils sont.
    Quand ils sortent, tous deux egaux, du sanctuaire,
    L'un dans sa pourpre, et l'autre avec son blanc suaire[34],
    L'univers ebloui contemple avec terreur
    Ces deux moities de Dieu, le pape et l'empereur.
    --L'empereur! l'empereur! etre empereur!--O rage,
    Ne pas l'etre! et sentir son coeur plein de courage!--
    Qu'il fut heureux celui qui dort dans ce tombeau!
    Qu'il fut grand! De son temps c'etait encor plus beau.
    Le pape et l'empereur! ce n'etait plus deux hommes.
    Pierre et Cesar! en eux accouplant les deux Romes[35],
    Fecondant l'une et l'autre en un mystique hymen,
    Redonnant une forme, une ame au genre humain,
    Faisant refondre en bloc peuples et pele-mele
    Royaumes, pour en faire une Europe nouvelle,
    Et tous deux remettant au moule de leur main
    Le bronze qui restait du vieux monde romain!
    Oh! quel destin!--Pourtant cette tombe est la sienne!
    Tout est-il donc si peu que ce soit la qu'on vienne?
    Quoi donc! avoir ete prince, empereur et roi!
    Avoir ete l'epee, avoir ete la loi!
    Geant, pour piedestal avoir eu l'Allemagne!
    Quoi! pour titre cesar et pour nom Charlemagne!
    Avoir ete plus grand qu'Annibal, qu'Attila,
    Aussi grand que le monde!... et que tout tienne la!
    Ah! briguez donc l'empire, et voyez la poussiere
    Que fait un empereur! Couvrez la terre entiere
    De bruit et de tumulte; elevez, batissez
    Votre empire, et jamais ne dites: C'est assez!
    Taillez a larges pans[36] un edifice immense!
    Savez-vous ce qu'un jour il en reste? o demence!
    Cette pierre! Et du titre et du nom triomphants?
    Quelques lettres a faire epeler des enfants!
    Si haut que soit le but ou votre orgueil aspire,
    Voila le dernier terme!...-Oh! l'empire! l'empire!
    Que m'importe! j'y touche, et le trouve a mon gre.
    Quelque chose me dit: Tu l'auras!--Je l'aurai--
    Si je l'avais!...--O ciel! etre ce qui commence!
    Seul, debout, au plus haut de la spirale immense!
    D'une foule d'etats l'un sur l'autre etages
    Etre la clef de voute[37], et voir sous soi ranges
    Les rois, et sur leur tete essuyer ses sandales;
    Voir au-dessous des rois les maisons feodales,
    Margraves, cardinaux, doges, ducs a fleurons[38];
    Puis eveques, abbes, chefs de clans, hauts barons,
    Puis clercs et soldats; puis, loin du faite ou nous sommes,
    Dans l'ombre, tout au fond de l'abime,--les hommes.
    --Les hommes! c'est-a-dire une foule, une mer,
    Un grand bruit, pleurs et cris, parfois un rire amer,
    Plainte qui, reveillant la terre qui s'effare,
    A travers tant d'echos nous arrive fanfare[39]!
    Les hommes!--Des cites, des tours, un vaste essaim,
    De hauts clochers d'eglise a sonner le tocsin!--

_Revant_.
    Base de nations portant sur leurs epaules[40]
    La pyramide enorme appuyee aux deux poles,
    Flots vivants, qui toujours l'etreignant[41] de leurs plis,
    La balancent, branlante, a leur vaste roulis,
    Font tout changer de place et, sur ses hautes zones[42],
    Comme des escabeaux font chanceler les trones,
    Si bien que tous les rois, cessant leurs vains debats,
    Levent les yeux au ciel... Rois! regardez en bas!
    --Ah! le peuple!--ocean!--onde sans cesse emue,
    Ou l'on ne jette rien sans que tout ne remue!
    Vague qui broie un trone et qui berce un tombeau!
    Miroir ou rarement un roi se voit en beau!
    Ah! si l'on regardait parfois dans ce flot sombre,
    On y verrait au fond des empires[43] sans nombre,
    Grands vaisseaux naufrages, que son flux[44] et reflux
    Roule, et qui le genaient, et qu'il[45] ne connait plus!
    --Gouverner tout cela!--Monter, si l'on vous nomme,
    A ce faite! Y monter, sachant qu'on n'est qu'un homme!
    Avoir l'abime la!...--Pourvu qu'en ce moment
    Il n'aille pas me prendre[46] un eblouissement!
    Oh! d'etats et de rois mouvante pyramide,
    Ton faite est bien etroit! Malheur au pied timide!
    A qui me retiendrais-je! Oh! si j'allais faillir
    En sentant sous mes pieds le monde tressaillir!
    En sentant vivre, sourdre et palpiter la terre!
    --Puis, quand j'aurai ce globe entre mes mains, qu'en faire?
    Le pourrai-je porter seulement[47]? Qu'ai-je en moi?
    Etre empereur, mon Dieu! J'avais trop d'etre roi!
    Certe, il n'est qu'un mortel de race peu commune
    Dont puisse s'elargir l'ame avec la fortune.
    Mais moi! qui me fera grand? qui sera ma loi?
    Qui me conseillera?

_Il tombe a deux genoux devant le tombeau_.
    Charlemagne! c'est toi!
    Ah! puisque Dieu, pour qui tout obstacle s'efface,
    Prend nos deux majestes et les met face a face,
    Verse-moi dans le coeur, du fond de ce tombeau,
    Quelque chose de grand, de sublime et de beau!
    Oh! par tous ses cotes fais-moi voir toute chose.
    Montre-moi que le monde est petit, car je n'ose
    Y toucher. Montre-moi que sur cette Babel
    Qui du patre a Cesar va montant jusqu'au ciel,
    Chacun en son degre se complait et s'admire,
    Voit l'autre par-dessous et se retient d'en rire.
    Apprends-moi tes secrets de vaincre et de regner,
    Et dis-moi qu'il vaut mieux punir que pardonner!
    --N'est-ce pas?--S'il est vrai qu'en son lit solitaire
    Parfois une grande ombre au bruit que fait la terre
    S'eveille, et que soudain son tombeau large et clair
    S'entr'ouvre, et dans la nuit jette au monde un eclair,
    Si cette chose est vraie, empereur d'Allemagne,
    Oh! dis-moi ce qu'on peut faire apres Charlemagne!
    Parle! dut en parlant[48] ton souffle souverain
    Me briser sur le front cette porte d'airain!
    Ou plutot, laisse-moi seul dans ton sanctuaire
    Entrer, laisse-moi voir ta face mortuaire,
    Ne me repousse pas d'un souffle d'aquilons.
    Sur ton chevet de pierre accoude-toi. Parlons.
    Oui, dusses-tu me dire[49], avec ta voix fatale,
    De ces choses qui font l'oeil sombre et le front pale!
    Parle, et n'aveugle pas ton fils epouvante,
    Car ta tombe sans doute est pleine de clarte!
    Ou, si tu ne dis rien, laisse en ta paix profonde
    Carlos etudier ta tete comme un monde;
    Laisse qu'il te mesure a loisir, o geant.
    Car rien n'est ici-bas si grand que ton neant!
    Que la cendre, a defaut de l'ombre, me conseille!

_Il approche la clef de la serrure_.
    Entrons.

_Il recule_.
    Dieu! s'il allait me parler a l'oreille!
    S'il etait la, debout et marchant a pas lents!
    Si j'allais ressortir avec de cheveux blancs!
    Entrons toujours!

_Bruit de pas_.
    On vient. Qui donc ose a cette heure,
    Hors moi, d'un pareil mort eveiller la demeure?
    Qui donc?

_Le bruit s'approche_.
    Ah! j'oubliais! ce sont mes assassins.
    Entrons!

_Il ouvre la porte du tombeau, qu'il referme sur lui.--Entrent
plusieurs hommes, marchant a pas sourds, caches sous leurs manteaux
et leurs chapeaux_.




SCENE III.


LES CONJURES. _Ils vont les uns aux autres, en se prenant la main et
en echangeant quelques paroles a voix basse_.

PREMIER CONJURE (_portant seul une torche allumee_).
    _Ad augusta_.

DEUXIEME CONJURE.
    _Per angusta_.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Les saints
    Nous protegent.

TROISIEME CONJURE.
    Les morts nous servent.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Dieu nous garde.

_Bruit de pas dans l'ombre_.

DEUXIEME CONJURE.
    Qui vive[50]?

VOIX DANS L'OMBRE.
    _Ad augusta_.

DEUXIEME CONJURE.
    _Per angusta_.

_Entrent de nouveaux conjures.--Bruit de pas_.

PREMIER CONJURE (_au troisieme_).
    Regarde;
    Il vient encor quelqu'un.

TROISIEME CONJURE.
    Qui vive?

VOIX DANS L'OMBRE.
    _Ad augusta_.

TROISIEME CONJURE.
    _Per augusta_.

_Entrent de nouveaux conjures, qui echangent des signes de mains avec
tous les autres_.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    C'est bien. Nous voila tous.--Gotha,
    Fais le rapport.--Amis, l'ombre attend la lumiere.

_Tous les conjures s'asseyent en demi-cercle sur des tombeaux. Le
premier conjure passe tour a tour devant tous, et chacun allume a sa
torche une cire qu'il tient a la main. Puis le premier conjure va
s'asseoir en silence sur une tombe au centre du cercle et plus haute
que les autres_.

LE DUC DE GOTHA (_se levant_).
    Amis, Charles d'Espagne, etranger par sa mere[51],
    Pretend au saint-empire.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Il aura le tombeau.

LE DUC DE GOTHA (_Il jette sa torche a terre et l'ecrase du pied_).
    Qu'il en soit de son front comme de ce flambeau!

TOUS.
    Que ce soit!

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Mort a lui!

LE DUC DE GOTHA.
    Qu'il meure!

TOUS.
    Qu'on l'immole!

DON JUAN DE HARO.
    Son pere est allemand.

LE DUC DE LUTZELBOURG.
    Sa mere est espagnole.

LE DUC DE GOTHA.
    Il n'est plus espagnol et n'est pas allemand.
    Mort!

UN CONJURE.
    Si les electeurs allaient en ce moment
    Le nommer empereur?

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Eux! lui! jamais!

DON GIL TELLEZ GIRON.
    Qu'importe!
    Amis! frappons la tete et la couronne est morte!

PREMIER CONJURE,
    S'il a le saint-empire, il devient, quel qu'il soit,
    Tres auguste, et Dieu seul peut le toucher du doigt!

LE DUC DE GOTHA.
    Le plus sur, c'est qu'avant d'etre auguste, il expire.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    On ne l'elira point!

TOUS.
    Il n'aura pas l'empire!

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Combien faut-il de bras pour le mettre au linceul?

TOUS.
    Un seul.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Combien faut-il de coups au coeur?

TOUS.
    Un seul.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Qui frappera?

TOUS.
    Nous tous.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    La victime est un traitre.
    Ils font un empereur; nous, faisons un grand pretre.
    Tirons au sort.

_Tous les conjures ecrivent leurs noms sur leurs tablettes, dechirent
la feuille, la roulent, et vont l'un apres l'autre la jeter dans
l'urne d'un tombeau.--Puis le premier conjure dit_:
    Prions.

_Tous s'agenouillent. Le premier conjure se leve et dit_:
    Que l'elu croie en Dieu,
    Frappe comme un Romain, meure comme un Hebreu[52]!
    Il faut qu'il brave roue et tenailles mordantes[53],
    Qu'il chante aux chevalets[54], rie aux lampes ardentes[55],
    Enfin que pour tuer et mourir, resigne,
    Il fasse tout!

_Il tire un des parchemins de l'urne_.

TOUS.
    Quel nom?

PREMIER CONJURE (_a haute voix_).
    Hernani.

HERNANI (_sortant de la foule des conjures_).
    J'ai gagne!
    --Je te tiens, toi que j'ai si longtemps poursuivie,
    Vengeance!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_percant la foule et prenant Hernani a part_).
    Oh! cede-moi ce coup!

HERNANI.
    Non, sur ma vie!
    Oh! ne m'enviez pas ma fortune, seigneur!
    C'est la premiere fois qu'il m'arrive bonheur.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Tu n'as rien. Eh bien, tout, fiefs, chateaux, vasselages,
    Cent mille paysans dans mes trois cents villages,
    Pour ce coup a frapper, je te les donne, ami!

HERNANI.
    Non!

LE DUC DE GOTHA.
    Ton bras porterait un coup moins affermi,
    Vieillard!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Arriere, vous! sinon le bras, j'ai l'ame.
    Aux rouilles du fourreau ne jugez point la lame.

_A Hernani_.
    Tu m'appartiens!

HERNANI.
    Ma vie a vous, la sienne a moi.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_tirant le cor de sa ceinture_).
    Eh bien, ecoute, ami. Je te rends ce cor[56].

HERNANI (_ebranle_).
    Quoi!
    La vie!--Eh! que m'importe!	Ah! je tiens ma vengeance!
    Avec Dieu dans ceci je suis d'intelligence[57].
    J'ai mon pere a venger... peut-etre plus encor!
    Elle, me la rends-tu?

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Jamais! Je rends ce cor.

HERNANI.
    Non!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Reflechis, enfant!

HERNANI.
    Duc, laisse-moi ma proie.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Eh bien! maudit sois-tu de m'oter cette joie!

_Il remet le cor a sa ceinture_.

PREMIER CONJURE (_a Hernani_).
    Frere! avant qu'on ait pu l'elire, il serait bien
    D'attendre des ce soir[58] Carlos...

HERNANI.
    Ne craignez rien
    Je sais comment on pousse un homme dans la tombe.

PREMIER CONJURE.
    Que toute trahison sur le traitre[59] retombe,
    Et Dieu soit avec vous!--Nous, comtes et barons,
    S'il perit[60] sans tuer, continuons! Jurons
    De frapper tour a tour et sans nous y soustraire[61]
    Carlos qui doit mourir.

TOUS (_tirant leurs epees_).
    Jurons!

LE DUC DE GOTHA (au premier conjure).
    Sur quoi, mon frere?

DON RUY GOMEZ (_retourne son epee, la prend par la pointe et l'eleve
au-dessus de sa tete_).
    Jurons sur cette croix[62]!

TOUS (_elevant leurs epees_).
    Qu'il meure impenitent!

_On entend un coup de canon eloigne. Tous s'arretent en silence.--La
porte du tombeau s'entr'ouvre. Don Carlos parait sur le seuil. Pale,
il ecoute.--Un second coup.--Un troisieme coup.--Il ouvre tout a fait
la porte du tombeau, mais sans faire un pas, debout et immobile sur
le seuil_.




SCENE IV.

LES CONJURES, DON CARLOS: _puis_ DON RICARDO, SEIGNEURS, GARDES; LE
ROI DE BOHEME, LE DUC DE BAVIERE; _puis_ DONA SOL.


DON CARLOS.
    Messieurs, allez plus loin! l'empereur vous entend.

_Tous les flambeaux s'eteignent a la fois.--Profond silence.--Il fait
un pas dans les tenebres, si epaisses qu'on y distingue a peine les
conjures, muets et immobiles_.
    Silence et nuit! l'essaim en sort et s'y replonge.
    Croyez-vous que ceci va passer comme un songe,
    Et que je vous prendrai, n'ayant plus vos flambeaux,
    Pour des hommes de pierre assis sur leurs tombeaux?
    Vous parliez tout a l'heure assez haut, mes statues!
    Allons! relevez donc vos tetes abattues,
    Car voici Charles-Quint! Frappez, faites un pas!
    Voyons, oserez-vous?--Non, vous n'oserez pas.
    Vos torches flamboyaient sanglantes sous ces voutes.
    Mon souffle a donc suffi pour les eteindre toutes!
    Mais voyez, et tournez vos yeux irresolus,
    Si j'en eteins beaucoup, j'en allume encor plus.

_Il frappe de la clef de fer sur la porte de bronze du tombeau. A ce
bruit, toutes les profondeurs du souterrain se remplissent de soldats
portant des torches et des pertuisanes. A leur tete, le duc d'Alcala,
le marquis d'Almunan_.
    Accourez, mes faucons! j'ai le nid, j'ai la proie!

_Aux conjures_.
    J'illumine a mon tour. Le sepulcre flamboie,
    Regardez!

_Aux soldats_.
    Venez tous, car le crime est flagrant.

HERNANI (_regardant les soldats_).
    A la bonne heure! Seul il me semblait trop grand.
    C'est bien. J'ai cru d'abord que c'etait Charlemagne.
    Ce n'est que Charles-Quint.

DON CARLOS (_au duc d'Alcala_).
    Connetable d'Espagne[63]!

_Au marquis d'Almunan_.
    Amiral de Castille, ici!--Desarmez-les.

_On entoure les conjures et on les desarme_.

DON RICARDO (_accourant et s'inclinant jusqu'a terre_).
    Majeste[64]!

DON CARLOS.
    Je te fais alcade du palais[65].

DON RICARDO (_s'inclinant de nouveau_).
    Deux electeurs[66], au nom de la chambre doree[67],
    Viennent complimenter la majeste sacree.

DON CARLOS.
    Qu'ils entrent.

_Bas a Ricardo_.
    Dona Sol.

_Ricardo salue et sort. Entrent, avec flambeaux et fanfares, le roi
de Boheme et le duc de Baviere, tout en drap d'or, couronnes en
tete.--Nombreux cortege de seigneurs allemands, portant la banniere
de l'empire, l'aigle a deux tetes, avec l'ecusson d'Espagne au
milieu--Les soldats s'ecartent, se rangent en haie, et font passage
aux deux electeurs, jusqu'a l'empereur, qu'ils saluent profondement,
et qui leur rend leur salut en soulevant son chapeau_.

LE DUC DE BAVIERE.
    Charles! roi des Romains[68],
    Majeste tres sacree, empereur! dans vos mains
    Le monde est maintenant, car vous avez l'empire.
    Il est a vous, ce trone ou tout monarque aspire!
    Frederic, duc de Saxe, y fut d'abord elu,
    Mais, vous jugeant plus digne, il n'en a pas voulu.
    Venez donc recevoir la couronne et le globe.
    Le saint-empire, o roi, vous revet de la robe,
    Il vous arme du glaive, et vous etes tres grand.

DON CARLOS.
    J'irai remercier le college en rentrant.
    Allez, messieurs. Merci, mon frere de Boheme[69],
    Mon cousin de Baviere. Allez. J'irai moi-meme.

LE ROI DE BOHEME.
    Charles, du nom d'amis nos aieux se nommaient.
    Mon pere aimait ton pere, et leurs peres s'aimaient.
    Charles, si jeune en butte aux fortunes contraires,
    Dis, veux-tu que je sois ton frere entre tes freres?
    Je t'ai vu tout enfant, et ne puis oublier...

DON CARLOS (_l'interrompant_).
    Roi de Boheme! eh bien, vous etes familier[70]!

_Il lui presente sa main a baiser, ainsi qu'au duc de Baviere, puis
congedie les deux electeurs, qui le saluent profondement_.
    Allez!

_Sortent les deux electeurs avec leur cortege_.

LA FOULE.
    Vivat!

DON CARLOS _(a part_).
    J'y suis[71]! et tout m'a fait passage!
    Empereur!--Au refus de Frederic le Sage!

_Entre dona Sol, conduite par Ricardo_.

DONA SOL.
    Des soldats! l'empereur! O ciel! coup imprevu.
    Hernani!

HERNANI.
    Dona Sol!

DON RUY GOMEZ (a cote d'Hernani, a part).
    Elle ne m'a point vu!

_Dona Sol court a Hernani. Il la fait reculer d'un regard de
defiance_.

HERNANI.
    Madame!...

DONA SOL (_tirant le poignard de son sein_).
    J'ai toujours son poignard[72]!

HERNANI (_lui tendant les bras_).
    Mon amie!

DON CARLOS.
    Silence, tous!

_Aux conjures_.
    Votre ame est-elle raffermie?
    Il convient que je donne au monde une lecon.
    Lara le Castillan et Gotha le Saxon,
    Vous tous! que venait-on faire ici? parlez.

HERNANI (_faisant un pas_).
    Sire,
    La chose est toute simple, et l'on peut vous la dire.
    Nous gravions la sentence au mur de Balthazar[73].

_Il tire un poignard et l'agite_.
    Nous rendions a Cesar ce qu'on doit a Cesar.

DON CARLOS.
    Paix!

_A don Ruy Gomez_.
    Vous traitre, Silva!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Lequel de nous deux, sire?

HERNANI (_se retournant vers les conjures_).
    Nos tetes et l'empire! il a ce qu'il desire.

_A l'empereur_.
    Le bleu manteau des rois pouvait gener vos pas.
    La pourpre vous va mieux. Le sang n'y parait pas.

DON CARLOS (_a don Ruy Gomez_).
    Mon cousin de Silva, c'est une felonie
    A faire du blason rayer ta baronnie!
    C'est haute trahison, don Ruy, songez-y bien.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Les rois Rodrigue font les comtes Julien[74].

DON CARLOS (_au duc d'Alcala_).
    Ne prenez que ce qui peut etre duc ou comte.
    Le reste!...

_Don Ruy Gomez, le duc de Lutzelbourg, le duc de Gotha, don Juan de
Haro, don Guzman de Lara, don Tellez Giron, le baron de Hohenbourg, se
separent du groupe des conjures, parmi lesquels est reste Hernani.--Le
duc d'Alcala les entoure etroitement de gardes_.

DONA SOL (a part).
    Il est sauve!

HERNANI (_sortant du groupe des conjures_).
    Je pretends qu'on me compte!

_A don Carlos_.
    Puisqu'il s'agit de hache ici, que Hernani,
    Patre obscur, sous tes pieds passerait impuni,
    Puisque son front n'est plus au niveau de ton glaive,
    Puisqu'il faut etre grand pour mourir, je me leve.
    Dieu qui donne le sceptre et qui te le donna
    M'a fait duc de Segorbe[75] et duc de Cardona[76],
    Marquis de Monroy[77], comte Albatera[78], vicomte
    De Gor[79], seigneur de lieux dont j'ignore le compte.
    Je suis Jean d'Aragon, grand maitre d'Avis[80], ne
    Dans l'exil, fils proscrit d'un pere assassine
    Par sentence du tien, roi Carlos de Castille!
    Le meurtre est entre nous affaire de famille.
    Vous avez l'echafaud, nous avons le poignard.
    Donc, le ciel m'a fait duc, et l'exil montagnard.
    Mais puisque j'ai sans fruit aiguise mon epee
    Sur les monts et dans l'eau des torrents retrempee,

_Il met son chapeau. Aux autres conjures_:
    Couvrons-nous, grands d'Espagne!

_Tous les Espagnols se couvrent. A don Carlos_:
    Oui, nos tetes, o roi,
    Ont le droit de tomber couvertes devant toi!

_Aux prisonniers_.
    Silva, Haro, Lara, gens de titre et de race,
    Place a Jean d'Aragon! ducs et comtes, ma place!

_Aux courtisans et aux gardes_.
    Je suis Jean d'Aragon, roi, bourreaux et valets!
    Et si vos echafauds sont petits, changez-les!

_Il vient se joindre au groupe des seigneurs prisonniers_.

DONA SOL.
    Ciel!

DON CARLOS.
    En effet, j'avais oublie cette histoire.

HERNANI.
    Celui dont le flanc saigne a meilleure memoire.
    L'affront que l'offenseur oublie en insense
    Vit et toujours remue au coeur de l'offense.

DON CARLOS.
    Donc je suis, c'est un titre a n'en point vouloir d'autres,
    Fils de peres qui font choir la tete des votres!

DONA SOL (_se jetant a genoux devant l'empereur_).
    Sire, pardon! pitie! Sire, soyez clement!
    Ou frappez-nous tous deux, car il est mon amant,
    Mon epoux! En lui seul je respire. Oh! je tremble.
    Sire, ayez la pitie de nous tuer ensemble!
    Majeste! je me traine a vos sacres genoux!
    Je l'aime!  Il est a moi, comme l'empire a vous!
    Oh! grace!

_Don Carlos la regarde immobile_.
    Quel penser[81] sinistre vous absorbe?

DON CARLOS.
    Allons! relevez-vous, duchesse de Segorbe,
    Comtesse Albatera, marquise de Monroy...

_A Hernani_.
    Tes autres noms, don Juan?

HERNANI.
    Qui parle ainsi? le roi?

DON CARLOS.
    Non, l'empereur.

DONA SOL (_se relevant_),
    Grand Dieu!

DON CARLOS (_la montrant a Hernani_).
    Duc, voila ton epouse.

HERNANI (_les yeux au ciel, et dona Sol dans ses bras_).
    Juste Dieu!

DON CARLOS (_a don Ruy Gomez_).
    Mon cousin, ta noblesse est jalouse,
    Je sais. Mais Aragon peut epouser Silva.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_sombre_).
    Ce n'est pas ma noblesse.

HERNANI (_regardant dona Sol avec amour et la tenant embrassee_).
    Oh! ma haine s'en va!

_Il jette son poignard_.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a part, les regardant tous deux_).
    Eclaterai-je? oh! non! Fol amour! douleur folle!
    Tu leur ferais pitie, vieille tete espagnole!
    Vieillard, brule sans flamme, aime et souffre en secret.
    Laisse ronger ton coeur. Pas un cri. L'on rirait.

DONA SOL (_dans les bras d'Hernani_).
    0 mon duc!

HERNANI.
    Je n'ai plus que de l'amour dans l'ame.

DONA SOL.
    O bonheur!

DON CARLOS (_a part, la main dans sa poitrine_).
    Eteins-toi, coeur jeune et plein de flamme!
    Laisse regner l'esprit[82], que longtemps tu troublas.
    Tes amours desormais, tes maitresses, helas!
    C'est l'Allemagne, c'est la Flandre, c'est l'Espagne.

_L'oeil fixe sur sa banniere_.
    L'empereur est pareil a l'aigle, sa compagne.
    A la place du coeur il n'a qu'un ecusson[83].

HERNANI.
    Ah! vous etes Cesar!

DON CARLOS (_a Hernani_).
    De ta noble maison,
    Don juan, ton coeur est digne.

_Montrant dona Sol_.
    Il est digne aussi d'elle.
    --A genoux, duc!

_Hernani s'agenouille. Don Carlos detache sa toison-d'or et la lui
passe au cou_.
    Recois ce collier.

_Don Carlos tire son epee et l'en frappe trois fois sur l'epaule_.
    Sois fidele!
    Par saint Etienne[84], duc, je te fais chevalier.

_Il le releve et l'embrasse_.
    Mais tu l'as, le plus doux et le plus beau collier,
    Celui que je n'ai pas, qui manque au rang supreme,
    Les deux bras d'une femme aimee et qui vous aime!
    Ah! tu vas etre heureux; moi, je suis empereur.

_Aux conjures_.
    Je ne sais plus vos noms, messieurs. Haine et fureur,
    Je veux tout oublier. Allez, je vous pardonne!
    C'est la lecon qu'au monde il convient que je donne,
    Ce n'est pas vainement qu'a Charles premier, roi,
    L'empereur Charles-Quint succede, et qu'une loi
    Change, aux yeux de l'Europe, orpheline eploree,
    L'altesse catholique en majeste sacree.

_Les conjures tombent a genoux_.

LES CONJURES.
    Gloire a Carlos!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a don Carlos_).
    Moi seul je reste condamne.

DON CARLOS.
    Et moi!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a part_).
    Mais, comme lui, je n'ai point pardonne!

HERNANI.
    Qui donc nous change tous ainsi?

TOUS (_soldats, conjures, seigneurs_).
    Vive Allemagne!
    Honneur a Charles-Quint!

DON CARLOS (_se tournant vers le tombeau_).
    Honneur a Charlemagne!
    Laissez-nous seuls tous deux.

_Tous sortent_.




SCENE V.


DON CARLOS (_seul. _Il s'incline devant le tombeau_).
    Es-tu content de moi?
    Ai-je bien depouille les miseres du roi[85],
    Charlemagne? Empereur, suis-je bien un autre homme?
    Puis-je accoupler mon casque a la mitre de Rome?
    Aux fortunes du monde ai-je droit de toucher?
    Ai-je un pied sur et ferme, et qui puisse marcher
    Dans ce sentier, seme des ruines vandales,
    Que tu nous as battu de tes larges sandales?
    Ai-je bien a ta flamme allume mon flambeau?
    Ai-je compris la voix qui parle en ton tombeau?
    --Ah! j'etais seul, perdu, seul devant un empire,
    Tout un monde qui hurle, et menace, et conspire,
    Le Danois a punir[86], le Saint-Pere[87] a payer,
    Venise[88], Soliman[89], Luther, Francois premier,
    Mille poignards jaloux luisant deja dans l'ombre,
    Des pieges, des ecueils, des ennemis sans nombre,
    Vingt peuples dont un seul ferait peur a vingt rois,
    Tout presse, tout pressant, tout a faire a la fois,
    Je t'ai crie:--Par ou faut-il que je commence?
    Et tu m'as repondu:--Mon fils, par la clemence!




ACTE CINQUIEME - LA NOCE.


SARAGOSSE.

_Une terrasse du palais d'Aragon. Au fond, la rampe d'un escalier qui
s'enfonce dans le jardin. A droite et a gauche, deux portes donnant
sur une terrasse, que ferme une balustrade surmontee de deux rangs
d'arcades moresques, au-dessus et au travers desquelles on voit les
jardins du palais, les jets d'eau dans l'ombre, les bosquets avec les
lumieres qui s'y promenent, et au fond les faites gothiques et arabes
du palais illumine. Il est nuit. On entend des fanfares eloignees. Des
masques, des dominos, epars, isoles, ou groupes, traversent ca et la
la terrasse. Sur le devant, un groupe de jeunes seigneurs, les masques
a la main, riant et causant a grand bruit_.




SCENE PREMIERE.

DON SANCHO SANCHEZ DE ZUNIGA, Comte de MONTEREY, DON MATIAS CENTURION,
MARQUIS D'ALMURAN, DON RICARDO DE ROXAS, Comte de CASAPALMA, DON
FRANCISCO DE SOTOMAYOR, Comte de VELALCAZAR, DON GARCI SUAREZ DE
CARBAJAL, Comte DE PERALVER.


DON GARCI.
    Ma foi, vive la joie et vive l'epousee!

DON MATIAS (_regardant au balcon_).
    Saragosse ce soir se met a la croisee.

DON GARCI.
    Et fait bien! on ne vit jamais noce aux flambeaux
    Plus gaie, et nuit plus douce, et maries plus beaux!

DON MATIAS.
    Bon empereur!

DON SANCHO.
    Marquis, certain soir qu'a la brune
    Nous allions avec lui tous deux cherchant fortune[1],
    Qui nous eut dit qu'un jour tout finirait ainsi?

DON RICARDO (_l'interrompant_).
    J'en etais.

_Aux autres_.
    Ecoutez l'histoire que voici:
    Trois galants, un bandit que l'echafaud reclame,
    Puis un duc, puis un roi, d'un meme coeur de femme
    Font le siege a la fois. L'assaut donne, qui l'a?
    C'est le bandit.

DON FRANCISCO.
    Mais rien que de simple en cela.
    L'amour et la fortune, ailleurs comme en Espagne,
    Sont jeux de des pipes. C'est le voleur qui gagne!

DON RICARDO
    Moi, j'ai fait ma fortune a voir faire l'amour.
    D'abord comte, puis grand, puis alcade de cour,
    J'ai fort bien employe mon temps, sans qu'on s'en doute.

DON SANCHO.
    Le secret de monsieur, c'est d'etre sur la route
    Du roi...

DON RICARDO.
    Faisant valoir mes droits, mes actions.

DON GARCI.
    Vous avez profite de ses distractions.

DON MATIAS.
    Que devient le vieux duc? Fait-il clouer sa biere?

DON SANCHO.
    Marquis, ne riez pas! car c'est une ame fiere.
    Il aimait dona Sol, ce vieillard. Soixante ans
    Ont fait ses cheveux gris, un jour les a fait blancs.

DON GARCI.
    Il n'a pas reparu, dit-on, a Saragosse?

DON SANCHO.
    Vouliez-vous pas qu'il mit son cercueil de la noce[2]?

DON FRANCISCO.
    Et que fait l'empereur?

DON SANCHO.
    L'empereur aujourd'hui
    Est triste. Le Luther lui donne de l'ennui.

DON RICARDO.
    Ce Luther, beau sujet de soucis et d'alarmes!
    Que j'en finirais vite avec quatre gendarmes!

DON MATIAS.
    Le Soliman aussi lui fait ombre[3].

DON GARCI.
    Ah! Luther,
    Soliman, Neptunus, le diable et Jupiter,
    Que me font ces gens-la? Les femmes sont jolies,
    La mascarade est rare, et j'ai dit cent folies!

DON SANCHO.
    Voila l'essentiel.

DON RICARDO.
    Garci n'a point tort. Moi,
    Je ne suis plus le meme un jour de fete, et croi
    Qu'un masque que je mets me fait une autre tete,
    En verite!

DON SANCHO (_bas a don Matias_).
    Que n'est-ce alors tous les jours fete?

DON FRANCISCO (_montrant la porte a droite_).
    Messeigneurs, n'est-ce pas la chambre des epoux?

DON GARCI (_avec un signe de tete_).
    Nous les verrons venir dans l'instant.

DON FRANCISCO.
    Croyez-vous?

DON GARCI.
    He! sans doute!

DON FRANCISCO.
    Tant mieux. L'epousee est si belle!

DON RICARDO.
    Que l'empereur est bon! Hernani, ce rebelle
    Avoir la toison d'or! marie! pardonne!
    Loin de la, s'il m'eut cru, l'empereur eut donne
    Lit de pierre au galant, lit de plume a la dame.

DON SANCHO (_bas a don Matias_).
    Que je le creverais volontiers de ma lame,
    Faux seigneur de clinquant recousu de gros fil.
    Pourpoint de comte, empli de conseils d'alguazil[4]!

DON RICARDO (_s'approchant_).
    Que dites-vous la?

DON MATIAS (bas a don Sancho).
    Comte, ici pas de querelle!

_A don Ricardo_.
    Il me chante un sonnet de Petrarque a sa belle.

DON GARCI.
    Avez-vous remarque, messieurs, parmi les fleurs,
    Les femmes, les habits de toutes les couleurs,
    Ce spectre, qui, debout contre une balustrade,
    De son domino noir tachait la mascarade?

DON RICARDO.
    Oui, pardieu!

DON GARCI.
    Qu'est-ce donc?

DON RICARDO.
    Mais, sa taille, son air...
    C'est don Prancasio, general de la mer.

DON FRANCISCO.
    Non.

DON GARCI.
    Il n'a pas quitte son masque.

DON FRANCISCO.
    Il n'avait garde[5].
    C'est le duc de Soma qui veut qu'on le regarde.
    Rien de plus.

DON RICARDO.
    Non. Le duc m'a parle.

DON GARCI.
    Qu'est ce alors
    Que ce masque?--Tenez, le voila.

_Entre un domino noir qui traverse lentement la terrasse au fond. Tous
se retournent et le suivent des yeux, sans qu'il paraisse y prendre
garde_.

DON SANCHO.
    Si les morts
    Marchent, voici leur pas.

DON GARCI (_courant au domino noir_).
    Beau masque!...

_Le domino noir se retourne et s'arrete. Garci recule_.
    Sur mon ame,
    Messeigneurs, dans ses yeux j'ai vu luire une flamme!

DON SANCHO.
    Si c'est le diable, il trouve a qui parler[6].

_Il va au domino noir, toujours immobile_.
    Mauvais!
    Nous viens-tu de l'enfer?

LE MASQUE.
   Je n'en viens pas, j'y vais.

_Il reprend sa marche et disparait par la rampe de l'escalier[7].
Tous le suivent des yeux avec une sorte d'effroi_.

DON MATIAS.
    La voix est sepulcrale autant qu'on le peut dire.

DON GARCI.
    Baste! ce qui fait peur ailleurs, au bal fait rire.

DON SANCHO.
    Quelque mauvais plaisant[8]!

DON GARCI.
    Ou si c'est Lucifer
    Qui vient nous voir danser, en attendant l'enfer[9],
    Dansons!

DON SANCHO.
    C'est a coup sur quelque bouffonnerie.

DON MATIAS.
    Nous le saurons demain.

DON SANCHO (_a don Matias_).
    Regardez, je vous prie.
    Que devient-il?

DON MATIAS (_a la balustrade de la terrasse).
    Il a descendu l'escalier.
    Plus rien.

DON SANCHO.
    C'est un plaisant drole[10]!

_Revant_.
    C'est singulier.

DON GARCI (_a une dame qui passe_).
    Marquise, dansons-nous celle-ci[11]?

_Il la salue et lui presente la main_.

LA DAME.
    Mon cher comte,
    Vous savez, avec vous, que mon mari les compte[12].

DON GARCI.
    Raison de plus. Cela l'amuse apparemment.
    C'est son plaisir. Il compte[13], et nous dansons.

_La dame lui donne la main, et ils sortent_.

DON SANCHO (_pensif_).
    Vraiment,
    C'est singulier!

DON MATIAS.
    Voici les maries. Silence!

_Entrent Hernani et dona Sol se donnant la main. Dona Sol en
magnifique habit de mariee; Hernani tout en velours noir, avec la
toison-d'or au cou. Derriere eux, foule de masques, de dames et de
seigneurs qui leur font cortege. Deux hallebardiers en riche livree
les suivent, et quatre pages les precedent. Tout le monde se range et
s'incline sur leur passage. Fanfare_.




SCENE II.

LES MEMES, HERNANI, DONA SOL, SUITE.


HERNANI (_saluant_).
    Chers amis!

DON RICARDO (_allant a lui et s'inclinant_).
    Ton bonheur fait le notre, excellence!

DON FRANCISCO (_contemplant dona Sol_).
    Saint Jacques monseigneur[14]! c'est Venus qu'il conduit!

DON MATIAS.
    D'honneur, on est heureux un pareil jour la nuit!

DON FRANCISCO (_montrant a don Matias la chambre nuptiale_).
    Qu'il va se passer la de gracieuses choses!
    Etre fee, et tout voir, feux eteints, portes closes,
    Serait-ce pas charmant!

DON SANCHO (_a don Matias_).
    Il est tard. Partons-nous?

_Tous vont saluer les maries et sortent, les uns par la porte, les
autres par l'escalier du fond_.

HERNANI (_les reconduisant_).
    Dieu vous garde!

DON SANCHO (_reste le dernier, lui serre la main_).
    Soyez heureux!

_Il sort. Hernani et dona Sol restent seuls. Bruit de pas et de
voix qui s'eloignent, puis cessent tout a fait. Pendant tout le
commencement de la scene qui suit, les fanfares et les lumieres
eloignees s'eteignent par degres. La nuit et le silence reviennent
peu a peu_.




SCENE III.

HERNANI, DONA SOL.


DONA SOL.
    Ils s'en vont tous,
    Enfin!

HERNANI (_cherchant a l'attirer dans ses bras_).
    Cher amour!

DONA SOL (_rougissant et reculant_).
    C'est... qu'il est tard, ce me semble.

HERNANI.
    Ange! il est toujours tard pour etre seuls ensemble.

DONA SOL.
    Ce bruit me fatiguait. N'est-ce pas, cher seigneur,
    Que toute cette joie etourdit le bonheur?

HERNANI.
    Tu dis vrai. Le bonheur, amie[15], est chose grave.
    Il veut des coeurs de bronze et lentement s'y grave.
    Le plaisir l'effarouche en lui jetant des fleurs.
    Son sourire est moins pres du rire que des pleurs.

DONA SOL.
    Dans vos yeux, ce sourire est le jour.

_Hernani cherche a l'entrainer vers la porte. Elle rougit_.
    Tout a l'heure.

HERNANI.
    Oh! je suis ton esclave! Oui, demeure, demeure!
    Fais ce que tu voudras. Je ne demande rien.
    Tu sais ce que tu fais! ce que tu fais est bien!
    Je rirai si tu veux, je chanterai. Mon ame
    Brule. Eh! dis au volcan qu'il etouffe sa flamme,
    Le volcan fermera ses gouffres entr'ouverts,
    Et n'aura sur ses flancs que fleurs et gazons verts.
    Car le geant est pris, le Vesuve est esclave,
    Et que t'importe a toi son coeur ronge de lave?
    Tu veux des fleurs? c'est bien! Il faut que de son mieux
    Le volcan tout brule s'epanouisse aux yeux!

DONA SOL.
    Oh! que vous etes bon pour une pauvre femme,
    Hernani de mon coeur!

HERNANI.
    Quel est ce nom, madame?
    Ah! ne me nomme plus de ce nom, par pitie!
    Tu me fais souvenir que j'ai tout oublie!
    Je sais qu'il existait autrefois, dans un reve,
    Un Hernani, dont l'oeil avait l'eclair du glaive,
    Un homme de la nuit et des monts, un proscrit
    Sur qui le mot _vengeance_ etait partout ecrit,
    Un malheureux trainant apres lui l'anatheme!
    Mais je ne connais pas ce Hernani.--Moi, j'aime
    Les pres, les fleurs, les bois, le chant du rossignol.
    Je suis Jean d'Aragon, mari de dona Sol!
    Je suis heureux!

DONA SOL.
    Je suis heureuse!

HERNANI.
    Que m'importe
    Les haillons qu'en entrant j'ai laisses a la porte!
    Voici que je reviens a mon palais en deuil.
    Un ange du Seigneur m'attendait sur le seuil.
    J'entre, et remets debout les colonnes brisees,
    Je rallume le feu, je rouvre les croisees,
    Je fais arracher l'herbe au pave de la cour,
    Je ne suis plus que joie, enchantement, amour.
    Qu'on me rende mes tours, mes donjons, mes bastilles,
    Mon panache, mon siege au conseil des Castilles,
    Vienne ma dona Sol[16] rouge et le front baisse,
    Qu'on nous laisse[17] tous deux, et le reste est passe!
    Je n'ai rien vu, rien dit, rien fait. Je recommence
    J'efface tout, j'oublie! Ou sagesse ou demence,
    Je vous ai, je vous aime, et vous etes mon bien!

DONA SOL (_examinant sa toison-d'or_).
    Que sur ce velours noir ce collier d'or fait bien!

HERNANI.
    Vous vites avant moi le roi mis de la sorte[18].

DONA SOL.
    Je n'ai pas remarque. Tout autre, que m'importe!
    Puis, est-ce le velours ou le satin encor?
    Non, mon duc, c'est ton cou qui sied au collier d'or.
    Vous etes noble et fier, monseigneur.

_Il veut l'entrainer._
    Tout a l'heure!
    Un moment!--Vois-tu bien, c'est la joie et je pleure!
    Viens voir la belle nuit.

_Elle va a la balustrade_.
    Mon duc, rien qu'un moment!
    Le temps de respirer et de voir seulement.
    Tout s'est eteint, flambeaux et musique de fete.
    Rien que la nuit et nous. Felicite parfaite!
    Dis, ne le crois-tu pas? sur nous, tout en dormant,
    La nature a demi veille amoureusement.
    Pas un nuage au ciel. Tout, comme nous, repose.
    Viens, respire avec moi l'air embaume de rose!
    Regarde. Plus de feux, plus de bruit. Tout se tait.
    La lune tout a l'heure a l'horizon montait
    Tandis que tu parlais, sa lumiere qui tremble
    Et ta voix, toutes deux m'allaient au coeur ensemble,
    Je me sentais joyeuse et calme, o mon amant,
    Et j'aurais bien voulu mourir en ce moment!

HERNANI.
    Ah! qui n'oublierait tout a cette voix celeste!
    Ta parole est un chant ou rien d'humain ne reste.
    Et, comme un voyageur, sur un fleuve emporte,
    Qui glisse sur les eaux par un beau soir d'ete
    Et voit fuir sous ses yeux mille plaines fleuries,
    Ma pense entrainee erre en tes reveries!

DONA SOL.
    Ce silence est trop noir, ce calme est trop profond.
    Dis, ne voudrais-tu pas voir une etoile au fond?
    Ou qu'une voix des nuits, tendre et delicieuse,
    S'elevant tout a coup, chantat?...

HERNANI (_souriant_).
    Capricieuse!
    Tout a l'heure on fuyait la lumiere et les chants!

DONA SOL.
    Le bal! Mais un oiseau qui chanterait aux champs!
    Un rossignol perdu dans l'ombre et dans la mousse,
    Ou quelque flute au loin!... Car la musique est douce,
    Fait l'ame harmonieuse, et, comme un divin choeur,
    Eveille mille voix qui chantent dans le coeur
    Ah! ce serait charmant[19]!

_On entend le bruit lointain d'un cor dans l'ombre._
    Dieu! je suis exaucee!

HERNANI (_tressaillant, a part_).
    Ah! malheureuse!

DONA SOL.
    Un ange a compris ma pensee.
    Ton bon ange sans doute?

HERNANI (_amerement_).
    Oui, mon bon ange!

_Le cor recommence.--A part_.
    Encor!

DONA SOL (_souriant_).
    Don Juan, je reconnais le son de votre cor!

HERNANI.
    N'est-ce pas?

DONA SOL.
    Seriez-vous dans cette serenade
    De moitie[20]?

HERNANI.
    De moitie, tu l'as dit.

DONA SOL.
    Bal maussade!
    Oh! que j'aime bien mieux le cor au fond des bois!
    Et puis, c'est votre cor, c'est comme votre voix.

_Le cor recommence._

HERNANI (_a part_).
    Ah! le tigre est en bas qui hurle, et veut sa proie.

DONA SOL.
    Don Juan, cette harmonie emplit le coeur de joie.

HERNANI (_se levant terrible_).
    Nommez-moi Hernani! nommez-moi Hernani!
    Avec ce nom fatal je n'en ai pas fini!

DONA SOL (_tremblante_).
    Qu'avez-vous?

HERNANI.
    Le vieillard!

DONA SOL.
    Dieu! quels regards funebres!
    Qu'avez-vous?

HERNANI.
    Le vieillard, qui rit dans les tenebres!
    --Ne le voyez-vous pas?

DONA SOL.
    Ou vous egarez-vous?
    Qu'est-ce que ce vieillard?

HERNANI.
    Le vieillard!

DONA SOL (_tombant a genoux_).
    A genoux
    Je t'en supplie, oh! dis, quel secret te dechire?
    Qu'as-tu?

HERNANI.
    Je l'ai jure!

DONA SOL.
    Jure?

_Elle suit tous ses mouvements avec anxiete. Il s'arrete tout a coup et
passe la main sur son front_.

HERNANI (a part).
    Qu'allais-je dire?
    Epargnons-la.

_Haut_.
    Moi, rien. De quoi t'ai-je parle?

DONA SOL.
    Vous avez dit...

HERNANI.
    Non. Non. J'avais l'esprit trouble...
    Je souffre un peu, vois-tu. N'en prends pas d'epouvante.

DONA SOL.
    Te faut-il quelque chose? ordonne a ta servante.

_Le cor recommence_.

HERNANI (_a part_).
    Il le veut! il le veut! Il a mon serment!

_Cherchant a sa ceinture sans epee et sans poignard_.
    --Rien!
    Ce devrait etre fait[21]!--Ah!...

DONA SOL.
    Tu souffres donc bien.

HERNANI.
    Une blessure ancienne, et qui semblait fermee,
    Se rouvre...

_A part_.
    Eloignons-la.

_Haut_.
    Dona Sol, bien-aimee,
    Ecoute. Ce coffret qu'en des jours--moins heureux
    Je portais avec moi...

DONA SOL.
    Je sais ce que tu veux.
    Eh bien, qu'en veux-tu faire?

HERNANI.
    Un flacon qu'il renferme
    Contient un elixir, qui pourra mettre un terme
    Au mal que je ressens.--Va!

DONA SOL.
    J'y vais, mon seigneur.

_Elle sort par la porte de la chambre nuptiale.




SCENE IV.


HERNANI (_seul_).
    Voila donc ce qu'il vient faire de mon bonheur!
    Voici le doigt fatal qui luit sur la muraille!
    Oh! que la destinee amerement me raille!

_Il tombe dans une profonde et convulsive reverie, puis se detourne
brusquement_.
    Eh bien?...--Mais tout se tait. Je n'entends rien venir.
    Si je m'etais trompe?...

_Le masque en domino noir parait au haut de la rampe. Hernani
s'arrete petrifie_.




SCENE V.

HERNANI, LE MASQUE.


LE MASQUE.
    "Quoi qu'il puisse advenir,
    Quand tu voudras, vieillard, quel que soit le lieu, l'heure,
    S'il te passe a l'esprit qu'il est temps que je meure,
    Viens, sonne de ce cor, et ne prends d'autres soins.
    Tout sera fait."--Ce pacte eut les morts pour temoins.
    Eh bien, tout est-il fait?

HERNANI (_a voix basse_).
    C'est lui!

LE MASQUE.
    Dans ta demeure
    Je viens, et je te dis qu'il est temps. C'est mon heure.
    Je te trouve en retard.

HERNANI.
    Bien. Quel est ton plaisir?
    Que feras-tu de moi? Parle.

LE MASQUE.
    Tu peux choisir
    Du fer ou du poison. Ce qu'il faut, je l'apporte.
    Nous partirons tous deux.

HERNANI.
    Soit.

LE MASQUE.
    Prions-nous?

HERNANI.
    Qu'importe!

LE MASQUE.
    Que prends-tu?

HERNANI.
    Le poison.

LE MASQUE.
    Bien!--Donne-moi ta main.

_Il presente une fiole a Hernani, qui la recoit en palissant_.
    Bois,--pour que je finisse.

_Hernani approche la fiole de ses levres, puis recule_.

HERNANI.
    Oh! par pitie, demain!--
    Oh! s'il te reste un coeur, duc, ou du moins une ame,
    Si tu n'es pas un spectre echappe de la flamme,
    Un mort damne, fantome ou demon desormais,
    Si Dieu n'a point encor mis sur ton front: jamais!
    Si tu sais ce que c'est que ce bonheur supreme
    D'aimer, d'avoir vingt ans, d'epouser quand on aime,
    Si jamais femme aimee a tremble dans tes bras,
    Attends jusqu'a demain! Demain tu reviendras!

LE MASQUE.
    Simple qui parle ainsi! Demain! demain!--Tu railles!
    Ta cloche a ce matin sonne tes funerailles!
    Et que ferais-je, moi, cette nuit?	J'en mourrais.
    Et qui viendrait te prendre et t'emporter apres?
    Seul descendre au tombeau! Jeune homme, il faut me suivre!

HERNANI.
    Eh bien, non! et de toi, demon, je me delivre!
    Je n'obeirai pas.

LE MASQUE.
    Je m'en doutais. Fort bien.
    Sur quoi donc m'as-tu fait ce serment!--Ah! sur rien.
    Peu de chose, apres tout! La tete de ton pere!
    Cela peut s'oublier. La jeunesse est legere.

HERNANI.
    Mon pere! Mon pere!...--Ah! j'en perdrai la raison!

LE MASQUE.
    Non, ce n'est qu'un parjure et qu'une trahison.

HERNANI
    Duc!

LE MASQUE.
    Puisque les aines des maisons espagnoles
    Se font jeu maintenant de fausser leurs paroles,
    Adieu!

_Il fait un pas pour sortir_.

HERNANI.
    Ne t'en va pas.

LE MASQUE.
    Alors...

HERNANI.
    Vieillard cruel

_Il prend la fiole._
    Revenir sur mes pas a la porte du ciel!

_Rentre dona Sol, sans voir le masque, qui est debout, au fond_.




SCENE VI.

LES MEMES, DONA SOL.


DONA SOL.
    Je n'ai pu le trouver, ce coffret.

HERNANI(_a part_).
    Dieu! C'est elle!
    Dans quel moment!

DONA SOL.
    Qu'a-t-il? je l'effraie, il chancelle
    A ma voix!--Que tiens-tu dans ta main? quel soupcon!
    Que tiens-tu dans ta main? reponds.

_Le domino s'est approche et se demasque. Elle pousse un cri, et
reconnait don Ruy._
    C'est du poison!

HERNANI.
    Grand Dieu!

DONA SOL (_a Hernani_).
    Que t'ai-je fait? quel horrible mystere!
    Vous me trompiez, don Juan!

HERNANI.
    Ah! j'ai du te le taire.
    J'ai promis de mourir au duc qui me sauva.
    Aragon doit payer cette dette a Silva.

DONA SOL.
    Vous n'etes pas a lui, mais a moi. Que m'importe
    Tous vos autres serments!

_A don Ruy Gomez._
    Duc, l'amour me rend forte,
    Contre vous, contre tous, duc, je le defendrai.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_immobile_).
    Defends-le, si tu peux, contre un serment jure.

DONA SOL.
    Quel serment?

HERNANI.
    J'ai jure.

DONA SOL.
    Non, non, rien ne te lie!
    Cela ne se peut pas! Crime! attentat! folie!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Allons, duc!

_Hernani fait un geste pour obeir. Dona Sol cherche a l'entrainer_.

HERNANI.
    Laissez-moi, dona Sol. Il le faut.
    Le duc a ma parole, et mon pere est la-haut!

DONA SOL (_a don Ruy Gomez_).
    Il vaudrait mieux pour vous aller aux tigres meme
    Arracher leurs petits qu'a moi celui que j'aime!
    Savez-vous ce que c'est que dona Sol? Longtemps,
    Par pitie pour votre age et pour vos soixante ans,
    J'ai fait la fille douce, innocente et timide,
    Mais voyez-vous cet oeil de pleurs de rage humide?

_Elle tire un poignard de son sein_.
    Voyez-vous ce poignard?--Ah! vieillard insense,
    Craignez vous pas le fer quand l'oeil a menace?
    Prenez-garde, don Ruy!--Je suis de la famille.
    Mon oncle!--Ecoutez-moi. Fusse-je votre fille[22],
    Malheur si vous portez la main sur mon epoux!

_Elle jette le poignard, et tombe a genoux devant le duc_.
    Ah! je tombe a vos pieds! Ayez pitie de nous!
    Grace! Helas! monseigneur, je ne suis qu'une femme,
    Je suis faible, ma force avorte dans mon ame,
    Je me brise aisement. Je tombe a vos genoux!
    Ah! je vous en supplie, ayez pitie de nous.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Dona Sol!

DONA SOL.
    Pardonnez! Nous autres Espagnoles,
    Notre douleur s'emporte a de vives paroles,
    Vous le savez. Helas! vous n'etiez pas mechant!
    Pitie! vous me tuez, mon oncle, en le touchant!
    Pitie! je l'aime tant!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_sombre_).
    Vous l'aimez trop!

HERNANI.
    Tu pleures!

DONA SOL.
    Non, non, je ne veux pas, mon amour, que tu meures!
    Non! je ne le veux pas.

_A don Ruy_.
    Faites grace aujourd'hui!
    Je vous aimerai bien aussi, vous.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Apres lui!
    De ces restes d'amour, d'amitie,--moins encore,
    Croyez-vous apaiser la soif qui me devore?

_Montrant Hernani_.
    Il est seul! il est tout! Mais moi, belle pitie!
    Qu'est-ce que je peux faire avec votre amitie?
    O rage! il aurait, lui, le coeur, l'amour, le trone,
    Et d'un regard de vous il me ferait l'aumone!
    Et s'il fallait un mot a mes voeux insenses,
    C'est lui qui vous dirait:--Dis cela, c'est assez!--
    En maudissant tous bas le mendiant avide!
    Auquel il faut jeter le fond du verre vide
    Honte! derision! non. Il faut en finir.
    Bois.

HERNANI.
    Il a ma parole, et je dois la tenir.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Allons!

_Hernani approche la fiole de ses levres. Dona Sol se jette sur son
bras_.

DONA SOL.
    Oh! pas encor! Daignez tous deux m'entendre.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Le sepulcre est ouvert, et je ne puis attendre.

DONA SOL.
    Un instant!--Mon seigneur! Mon don Juan!--Ah!
    tous deux
    Vous etes bien cruels! Qu'est-ce que je veux d'eux?
    Un instant! voila tout, tout ce que je reclame!
    Enfin, on laisse dire a cette pauvre femme
    Ce qu'elle a dans le coeur!...--Oh! laissez-moi parler!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a Hernani_).
    J'ai hate.

DONA SOL.
    Messeigneurs, vous me faites trembler!
    Que vous ai-je donc fait?

HERNANI.
    Ah! son cri me dechire.

DONA SOL (_lui retenant toujours le bras_).
    Vous voyez bien que j'ai mille choses a dire!

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a Hernani_).
    Il faut mourir.

DONA SOL (_toujours pendue au bras d'Hernani_).
    Don Juan, lorsque j'aurai parle
    Tout ce que tu voudras, tu le feras.

_Elle lui arrache la fiole_.
    Je l'ai!

_Elle eleve la fiole aux yeux d'Hernani et du vieillard etonne_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Puisque je n'ai ceans affaire qu'a deux femmes,
    Don Juan, il faut qu'ailleurs j'aille chercher des ames.
    Tu fais de beaux serments par le sang dont tu sors,
    Et je vais a ton pere en parler chez les morts!
    --Adieu...

_Il fait quelques pas pour sortir. Hernani le retient_.

HERNANI.
    Duc, arretez!

_A dona Sol._
    Helas! je t'en conjure,
    Veux-tu me voir faussaire, et felon, et parjure?
    Veux-tu que partout j'aille avec la trahison
    Ecrite sur le front? Par pitie, ce poison,
    Rends-le-moi! Par l'amour, par notre ame immortelle!...

DONA SOL (_sombre_).
    Tu veux?

_Elle boit_.
   Tiens, maintenant.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_a part_).
    Ah! c'etait donc pour elle!

DONA SOL (_rendant a Hernani la fiole a demi videe_).
    Prends, te dis-je.

HERNANI (_a don Ruy_).
    Vois-tu, miserable vieillard!

DONA SOL.
    Ne te plains pas de moi, je t'ai garde ta part.

HERNANI (_prenant la fiole_).
    Dieu!

DONA SOL.
    Tu ne m'aurais pas ainsi laisse la mienne,
    Toi! Tu n'as pas le coeur d'une epouse chretienne.
    Tu ne sais pas aimer comme aime une Silva.
    Mais j'ai bu la premiere et suis tranquille.--Va!
    Bois si tu veux!

HERNANI.
    Helas! qu'as-tu fait, malheureuse?

DONA SOL.
    C'est toi qui l'as voulu.

HERNANI.
    C'est une mort affreuse!

DONA SOL.
    Non. Pourquoi donc?

HERNANI.
    Ce philtre au sepulcre conduit.

DONA SOL.
    Devions-nous pas dormir ensemble cette nuit?
    Qu'importe dans quel lit?

HERNANI.
    Mon pere, tu te venges
    Sur moi qui t'oubliais!

_Il porte la fiole a sa bouche_.

DONA SOL (_se jetant sur lui_).
    Ciel! des douleurs etranges!...
    Ah! jette loin de toi ce philtre!--Ma raison
    S'egare. Arrete! Helas! mon don Juan, ce poison
    Est vivant! ce poison dans le coeur fait eclore
    Une hydre a mille dents qui ronge et qui devore!
    Oh! je ne savais pas qu'on souffrit a ce point!
    Qu'est-ce donc que cela? c'est du feu! Ne bois point!
    Oh! tu souffrirais trop!

HERNANI (_a don Ruy_).
    Ah! ton ame est cruelle!
    Pouvais-tu pas choisir d'autre poison pour elle?

_Il boit et jette la fiole_.

DONA SOL.
    Que fais-tu?

HERNANI.
    Qu'as-tu fait?

DONA SOL.
    Viens, o mon jeune amant,
    Dans mes bras.

_Ils s'asseyent l'un pres de l'autre_.
    N'est-ce pas qu'on souffre horriblement?

HERNANI.
    Non.

DONA SOL.
    Voila notre nuit de noces commencee!
    Je suis bien pale, dis, pour une fiancee?

HERNANI.
    Ah!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    La fatalite s'accomplit.

HERNANI.
    Desespoir!
    O tourment! dona Sol souffrir, et moi le voir!

DONA SOL.
    Calme-toi. Je suis mieux.--Vers des clartes nouvelles
    Nous allons tout a l'heure ensemble ouvrir nos ailes.
    Partons d'un vol egal vers un monde meilleur.
    Un baiser seulement, un baiser!

_Ils s'embrassent_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    O douleur!

HERNANI (_d'une voix affaiblie_).
    Oh! beni soit le ciel qui m'a fait une vie
    D'abimes entouree et de spectres suivie,
    Mais qui permet que, las d'un si rude chemin,
    Je puisse m'endormir ma bouche sur ta main!

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Qu'ils sont heureux[23]!

HERNANI (_d'une voix d plus en plus faible_).
    Viens, viens... dona Sol... tout est sombre...
    Souffres-tu?

DONA SOL (_d'une voix egalement eteinte_).
    Rien, plus rien.

HERNANI.
    Vois-tu des feux dans l'ombre?

DONA SOL.
    Pas encor.

HERNANI (_avec un soupir_).
    Voici...

_Il tombe_.

DON RUY GOMEZ (_soulevant sa tete, qui retombe_).
    Mort!

DONA SOL (_echevelee, et se dressant a demi sur son seant_).
    Mort! non pas! nous dormons.
    Il dort. C'est mon epoux, vois-tu. Nous nous aimons.
    Nous sommes couches la. C'est notre nuit de noce.

_D'une voix qui s'eteint_.
    Ne le reveillez pas, seigneur duc de Mendoce.
    Il est las.

_Elle retourne la figure d'Hernani_.
    Mon amour, tiens-toi vers moi tourne.
    Plus pres... plus pres encor...

_Elle retombe_.

DON RUY GOMEZ.
    Morte!--Oh! je suis damne.

_Il se tue_.




NOTES.




PREFACE.


1: poete mort. In the volume entitled "Litterature et Philosophie
melees" of the _edition definitive_, Hugo has an article "sur M.
Dovalle", which contains this quotation. Charles Dovalle, born 1807,
killed in a duel 1829, was the author of a volume of poetry, "Le
Sylphe", which appeared in 1830, with a preface by Hugo.

2: censure. During the Revolution all restrictions upon the liberty
of the press were removed, but in 1810 a directorship was established.
The charter of Louis XVIII in 1814 restored full liberty, but
restrictions were presently imposed, nevertheless. In 1819 the
censorship gave place to a system of sureties. An ordinance of St.
Cloud, in 1830, suspending the liberty of the press was one of the
causes of the revolution in that year, and the restrictions were
temporarily removed. Since then a limited censorship has generally
been maintained, but chiefly in regard to politics and criminal
processes.

3: regles de d'Aubignac. Francois Hedelin, abbe d'Aubignac
(1604-1676), was an authoritative literary critic, champion of
Aristotle and the three unities, author of a prose tragedy, Zenobie,
composed according to these rules and very stupid, and of a "Pratique
du Theatre". He was a bitter opponent of Corneille.

4: Cujas (1522-1590), a celebrated jurist of Toulouse, who
interpreted the Roman law in a more historical and less practical
sense than had been usual in France. His name thus stands for legal
pedantry. _Coutumes_ means legal usages, unwritten law.

5: Ni talons rouges, ni bonnets rouges. To wear red heels was a
privilege of aristocracy under the _ancien regime_, and the
_bonnet rouge_ was the liberty cap adopted as a head-dress by the
Revolutionists.

6: L'autre Saint Office, the Inquisition.

7: Romancero general, a collection of Spanish ballads, first
published under this name in 1604 and 1605. They were taken for
the most part, however, from song-books of the previous century,
especially a _Cancionero general_ of 1511, and a _Cancionero de
romances_ of 1555. But Hugo derived little from the _Romancero
general_ except the spirit of chivalry with which his drama is imbued.

8: The absurdly rigid critics of Corneille's day (1606-1684) found
fault even with the "Cid" for not being sufficiently classical;
Corneille himself called "Don Sanche" _une comedie heroique_, and was
at great pains to defend it as _un poeme d'une espece nouvelle, et qui
n'a point d'exemple chez les anciens_. "Nicomede" gave him the same
misgivings, and Voltaire, the most meticulous of critics, charged it
with being _trop vulgaire, trop populaire_.

9: Bourges. The cathedral of Bourges, a small city in central
France, is one of the most sincere and impressive monuments of Gothic
architecture. Its massiveness and originality atone easily for the
incongruities of its style.

10: PENDANT OPERA INTERRUPTA, Virgil, AEneid, iv. 88.




ACT I.


1: Isabelle la catholique (1451-1504), queen of Castile, and
patroness of Columbus. Her marriage with Ferdinand of Aragon (1469)
assured the unity of Spain. They are known in history as _Los reyes
catolicos_.

2: le regarde sous le nez, "looks sharply into his face".

3: main-forte, "Help!" Understand _pretez_.

4: Fiancee au vieux duc. Such a marriage was not legitimate except by
papal dispensation.

5: son vieux futur, "her old intended".

6: Si! Affirmative answer to a negative statement or question.

7: Le manche du balai, an indirect way of calling the duenna an old
witch.

8: Est-ce pas. The omission of _ne_ in such a case is frequent enough
in everyday speech; but here it is made in order to save a syllable.

9: The first part of this dialogue in Sc. 2 is very beautiful.
Notice the eagerness, tinged with melancholy, with which Hernani
goes straight to the subject of his love and appeals to Dona Sol's
sympathy, while she pretends to think only of his wet mantle, and
answers him evasively. The scene reminds one of the celebrated passage
in Goethe's "Egmont", where Egmont visits Clarchen in his Spanish
costume.

10: De tempete and d'eclairs depend upon _ce_ in the preceding line.

11: Est mort sur l'echafaud. It is not known that Hugo refers here
to any historical incident. The father of the king was Philip the
Handsome, son of the Emperor Maximilian, of the house of Austria. The
king's mother was Joanna, "crazy Jane", daughter of Ferdinand and
Isabella. Charles ascended the throne of the Castiles (Old and New) in
1516.

12: IL FAUT QUE J'EN ARRIVE A M'EFFRAYER MOI-MEME, "Fate has made me
a horror to myself."

13: riche-homme, "high-counsellor", an imitation of the Span.
_ricohombre_.

14: Grand de Castille, "grandee of Castile".

15: ENVIRA, a contraction of _enviera_.

16: peut-etre aurais-je aussi, "perhaps I have too", etc. There is
here a suppressed condition, by the hint of which the mystery of the
words is increased. But it will be seen, two lines further on,
that where _ai-je_ suits the metre the indicative is employed in a
precisely similar case.

17: ma bande, comme on dit, "my band, as they call it", this emphasis
on the word _bande_ being used to bring out the etymological force of
_bandit_ in the next line.

18: Toutes les Espagnes, for the Span. _todas las Espanas_, by which
was meant the kingdoms of Aragon, Castile, Leon, and Navarre.

19: La veille Catalogne. Catalonia, a province at the foot of the
Pyrenees, in the northeastern corner of Spain.

20: IL ME SOUVIENT, "I remember". The verb is impersonal; _pas_ is
not the antecedent of _il_.

21: veuillez, quoi qu'il advienne, "please, whatever may happen."

22: mais, a ce qu'il parait, "why, apparently."

23: et veux connaitre, "and I wish to know whom I have seen."
_Savoir_ would be more proper than _connaitre_.

24: Madame. The word had not always reference to a married woman
only, and of course it does not have here; translate "milady".

25: Je chiffonais ma veste a la francaise, "I was rumpling my French
doublet."

26: de belles equipees, "fine doings".

27: Saint Jacques monseigneur, "My lord Saint James." James the
apostle is patron saint of Spain.

28: Tete et sang, a fragment of the old forms of the oaths _tete
Dieu, sang Dieu_, which if expanded, in modern French, would be _par
la tete de Dieu, par le sang de Dieu_.

29: C'est trop de deux. "It is two too many."

30: Le Cid. An historical character of the eleventh century, by name
Ruy Diaz de Vivar, whom the Spaniards called _el Campeador_, the
Warrior, and the Arabs _Seid_, Lord, from which words came his popular
name, _el Cid Campeador_. He early became the subject of poems, of
which the oldest is the _Poema del Cid_, which dates from the
middle of the twelfth century. For the next four hundred years his
adventures, real and supposed, form the staple of the heroic romances
of Spain.

31: Bernard. Bernardo del Carpio, a semi-mythical character of the
eighth century, the reputed slayer of Roland at Roncesvalles; he also
was a hero of romance.

32: Faisait agenouiller leur amour aux eglises. "Sought for their
love the church's sanction."

33: Zamora, a small city on the river Duero. Hugo probably alludes to
its falling into the hands of Ferdinand in 1476.

34: carrousels, "tourneys".

35: Or il faut que, "Now, if I go out but for an hour."

36: Toison d'or. The order of the Golden Fleece was founded at Bruges
in 1429, by Philip, Duke of Burgundy, the husband of Isabella of
Portugal. It numbered originally thirty-one knights, pledged to defend
the faith, as the Argonauts had been pledged to seek the golden
fleece. Saint Simon tells us that this order and that of the Garter
were the only ones compatible with the French order of the Holy Ghost.
The marriage of Philip's grand-daughter to Maximilian of Austria in
1477, transferred the grand-mastership to the house of Hapsburg.

37: Feal, an old word, equivalent to _fidele_.

38: En ton palais. The preposition _dans_ is regularly used before a
defined noun, that is, a noun with an adjective or adjectival phrase.
But _dans_ would increase the line by one syllable, so that this is a
proper place for the exercise of poetic license.

39: Pour l'aller dire, would, in correct prose, be _pour aller le
dire_, but the same reason and the same permissible license have
prevailed here as in the preceding line.

40: Figuere, Span. _Figueras_, a fortified city in Catalonia, near
the French border.

41: Note, in this scene, the indifference of Don Carlos to the
subject of his grandfather's memory, contrasted with the piety of Don
Ruy Gomez.

42: Aix-la-Chapelle, German _Aachen_, Latin _Aquis granum_. Pronounce
Aix like _ex_. In its minster (_la chapelle_, whence the name)
Charlemagne is buried. It was here that the emperors were crowned, up
to Ferdinand I, who acceded in 1558.

43: Spire, German _Speyer_, celebrated for its cathedral, in which
many of the emperors are buried.

44: Francfort, German _Frankfurt am Main_, where, and not in Aachen,
the election took place.

45: aura ceci present, "will remember this."

46: On est bourgeois de Gand, "I am a citizen of Ghent", having been
born there, and hence being eligible to the imperial throne, as Ghent
was in the Empire.

47: Rome est pour moi, meaning that the Pope favored his claims,
which, however, he did not, but endeavored to remain neutral.

48: Cette tete allait bien au vieux corps germanique, "He was a
proper head to the old German body", meaning by _tete_ Maximilian, and
by _corps_ the Empire.

49: Le pape veut ravoir le Sicile. Since 1266, when Charles d'Anjou
was made a vassal of Pope Clement IV. and invested with Sicily and
Naples, the Holy See was considered to have some claim on them; but in
fact these possessions, called the Two Sicilies, had since 1282 been,
in the main, dependencies of the Spanish throne.

50: l'aigle, the imperial eagle, used here figuratively for what it
represented.

51: Qu'avec joie il verrait, "With what joy he would behold"; still
speaking of the late Emperor.

52: Que ferez-vous, mon fils. The supposed thoughts and remarks of
the Pope.

53: Consolez-vous! Don Ruy Gomez is still piously thinking of the
Emperor's death.

54: Sa France tres-chretienne. The kings of France were officially
denominated "Most Christian" and those of Spain "Most Catholic".

55: Ah! la part est pourtant belle, et vaut qu'on s'y tienne. "Ah!
but that is a portion grand enough and worth holding to", meaning that
France was enough for Francis.

56: Au roi Louis. Louis XII (1498-1515), predecessor of Francis I.

57: C'est un victorieux. Francis had since his accession to the
throne of France, in 1515, crossed the Alps, beaten the Swiss at
Marignan (Ital. _Melegnano_), and conquered the territory of Milan. He
did in fact dispute the claims of Charles to the imperial crown, but
by no means victoriously, for he was beaten and taken prisoner at the
battle of Pavia, in 1525. After the treaty of Madrid and his release
he entered into an alliance with Henry the Eighth, of England, and the
Italian states against Charles, and recommenced hostilities. This war,
however, ending in the peace of Cambrai in 1529, gave Italy definitely
into the hands of the Emperor. Francis' unsuccessful wars against
Charles continued until the peace of Crepy, in 1544.

58: Il faudrait tout changer. "Everything would have to be changed",
meaning that the election of Francis would be contrary to the
constitution of the Empire.

59: La bulle d'or. The Golden Bull (so called because of the pendent
gold seal, _bulla aurea_) was a decree of the Emperor Charles IV,
issued at the diet in Metz, in 1336, determining the choice of
emperors by a majority of the seven electors, whom it designated. The
_bulla aurea_ is still preserved in the "Roemer" at Frankfort.

60: A ce compte, seigneur, vous etes roi d'Espagne! "In that case,
my lord, you are King of Spain!" Don Ruy speaks with suppressed
exultation. The old nobility of Spain, and patriotic Spaniards
generally, looked with reluctance upon Charles' candidacy for the
imperial crown. Robertson, in his "History of the Reign of Charles the
Fifth", says: "The Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of
their king to the imperial throne with the same satisfaction which he
himself felt. To be deprived of the presence of their sovereign, and
to be subjected to the government of a viceroy and his council, a
species of administration often oppressive and always disagreeable,
were the immediate and necessary consequences of this new dignity. To
see the blood of their countrymen shed in quarrels wherein the nation
had no concern, to behold its treasures wasted in supporting the
splendor of a foreign title, were effects of this event almost as
unavoidable. From all these considerations they concluded that nothing
could have happened more pernicious to the Spanish nation; and the
fortitude and public spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of
Castile, prohibited Alfonzo the Wise from leaving the kingdom in order
to receive the imperial crown, were often mentioned with the highest
pride, and pronounced to be extremely worthy of imitation at this
juncture."

61: Je suis bourgeois de Gand. As a native of Ghent he claimed
citizenship in the Empire, Ghent being in Austrian Flanders.

62: On le dit un rude compagnon. "He is said to be a tough customer."

63: Galice, Galicia, a mountainous province in Spain, just north of
Portugal.

64: J'en aurai raison. "I shall bring him to terms", overcome him.

65: Oui, de ta suite, o roi! For such lines as this and the next
following Victor Hugo was much ridiculed when the tragedy first
appeared; and indeed a play upon words which involves such cacophony
is a doubtful ornament.

66: J'oubliais en l'aimant ta haine qui me charge. "I was forgetting
in my love of her my hate of you which fills me."

67: mouton d'or, the golden ram, the decoration worn by members of
the order of the Golden Fleece.

68: prendre, translate "find".




ACT II.


1: Patio, the Spanish name for an open court surrounded by a house.

2: chapeaux rabattus, "with hats pulled down over their eyes."

3: J'en veux a sa maitresse, etc. "I am after his mistress, not his
head."

4: qu'il ait un fils, literally: "let him but have a son by her, and
he'll be king."

5: fut-on altesse, etc. "even a Royal Majesty cannot get a king by a
countess."

6: C'est ce que nous disons, etc. "That is what we often say in your
Highness' antechamber."

7: Cependant que for _pendant que_.

8: mon peuple, "my servants". It is barely possible that the king
means to return Don Sancho's compliment goodnaturedly, but more
probably he says this to show him his place.

9: Poussez au drole une estocade. "Give the rascal a thrust."

10: Pendant qu'il reprendra ses esprits sur le gres. "While he is
recovering his senses on the flagstones."

11: Dont le roi fera bruit. "Of which the king can boast."

12: Navarre. Since 1512 Upper Navarre has belonged to Spain. Its
capital is Pamplona. Navarre north of the Pyrenees, or Lower Navarre,
has belonged to France since 1589.

13: Murcie, Murcia, formerly a Moorish kingdom, on the eastern coast
of Spain.

14: les Flamands, "the Flemings", inhabitants of the so-called
Spanish Netherlands, of which, in 1512, the Dutch provinces were
incorporated in the Burgundian division of the Empire.

15: l'Inde, "the Indies", meaning all the Spanish possessions in
America and the West Indies.

16: vous en obliez un, alluding to the opening words of Sc. 4 of
Act 1.

17: me monte a sa taille, "lifts me to his height".

18: Observe the change from _vous_ to _te_, to indicate the force
of the insult, the use of the second pers. sing. to persons whom one
would ordinarily address as _vous_ being a common way of expressing
contempt.

19: compagnon, "base fellow".

20: a moi, added merely for emphasis.

21: ca, "there!" probably drawing his sword.

22: fiscal, a Spanish word meaning an officer whose duty it is to
defend the king's civil rights and to prosecute criminals in his name,
"attorney-general".

23: Je vous fais mettre au ban du royaume. "I banish you from the
kingdom."

24: C'est un port. "It is a haven of refuge."

25: ou ta puissance tombe, "where your hand cannot reach."

26: alteree, "thirsty".

27: Je le declare. The "_le_" anticipates lines 17 and 18.

28: trainant au flanc, "bearing in my heart".

29: je veux qu'on m'envie, "worthy of envy".

30: Renoue a d'autres jours, etc. "To some other life attach thy life
which I have spoiled."

31: ennui, "sorrow".

32: sbires, "officers", from the Italian _sbirri_, "bailiffs",
"constables".

33: alcades, "wardens", from the Spanish _alcaide_, "jailer" or
"governor of a castle".

34: alerte, from the Italian _all' erta_, "on guard".




ACT III.


1: plus d'oncle! "I shall be done with being uncle."

2: Certe, for _certes_, the s being omitted to allow elision and thus
save a syllable.

3: On le verra bientot. Does this mean: "It (my blood) will soon be
seen"; or, "That (its nobility) will soon be evident"?

4: Derision! que cet amour boiteux... ait oublie. "What mockery that
this decrepit, bungling love... should have forgotten."

5: oui, c'en est la, "yes, it has come to that."

6: comme le tien. A glaring instance of _enjambement_, or the running
over of a clause at the end of a line.

7: J'ai nom Silva. The verb and the noun in this expression and many
similar ones are so closely connected that they may be considered as
forming a verbal expression, and indeed are frequently capable
of conversion into a verb. Here _j'ai nom_ is equivalent to _je
m'appelle_. Compare _trouver moyen, faire honneur, donner conseil_.

8: Le tout, pour etre, etc. "I would give all to be", etc.

9: qu'il ne s'use en paroles, "but that it will wear itself out in
mere words."

10: a l'aile vive et peinte, etc. "with bright and flashing wing and
amorous song." _Ramag_e originally meant only "boughs", "foliage",
then also _chant ramage_, "bird-song among the branches".

11: Au coeur on n'a jamais de rides. A fine sentiment, and one of the
many in this Act which win for the chivalrous Don Ruy the reader's
sympathy and respect.

12: prunelle, translate simply "eye".

13: encor. The _e_ is dropped to save a syllable, as the next word
begins with a consonant.

14: que introduces the real subject, _ce supreme effort_, etc.
anticipated by _ce_ in _c'est_, line 25.

15: encor. See note 13.

16: Et de ses derniers ans, etc. "And bears for him half the weight
of his remaining years."

17: See note 14.

18: a ce propos, "by the way".

19: C'en est fait d'Hernani. "It is all over with Hernani."

20: ecus du roi, "royal crown-pieces".

21: pour l'instant, "at present".

22: Paix et bonheur a vous. This salutation and the answer are
imitations of the Latin greetings between monks.

23: Armillas, a small mountain village in Aragon, near Montalvan,
about half-way between Saragossa and Teruel.

24: tu le pourras voir pendre. The object-pronoun is generally placed
directly before the verb on which it depends, so that this expression
would normally and in prose be _tu pourras le voir pendre_. Such
expressions as this, however, are common in Moliere.

25: Del Pilar. "Our Lady of the Pillar"; one of the two cathedrals of
Saragossa, so called because of the legend that St. James, coming into
Spain soon after the crucifixion to preach the gospel, fell asleep;
whereupon the Virgin Mary appeared on a jasper pillar and desired him
to erect a church on that spot. She is said to have come afterwards
to mass in the chapel which was built there, and which is now in the
centre of the cathedral and contains the pillar. This relic is a
favorite object of pilgrimage, as it is believed to cure diseases.

26: au fond du sombre corridor, "at the end of the gloomy aisle".

27: chasse ardente, "blazing shrine".

28: cape, "cope", a sacerdotal cloak reaching from the shoulders to
the feet, open in front, worn by priests celebrating mass.

29: ne te fais faute de rien, "make free use of everything".

30: L'avoir priee to portera bonheur. "It will bring you good luck to
have prayed to her."

31: carolus d'or, money pieces thus named because first coined under
Charles VIII of France and marked with his name.--(_Matzke_). Compare
_Louis d'or, Napoleon d'or_.

32: Perez ou Diego, meaning "You thought I was nobody in particular",
these being very common Christian names.

33: Je vais faire armer le chateau. He means that the presence of
Hernani will attract the king's troops, against whom, by the rules of
hospitality, be feels bound to protect his guest.

34: cent fois moins. Supply _rare_.

35: Grand merci de l'amour sur, profond et fidele. Ironical: "Thanks
for such deep, sure, faithful love."

36: ma patronne, "my patron saint".

37: qui m'outragez, "who insult me".

38: Croire que mon amour, etc. "How could he think that my love had
so short a memory! How could he think that all these inglorious men
could ever reduce a heart into which his name (Hernani's) has entered,
to lesser loves, though nobler in their eyes!"

39: insense, "madman".

40: Olmedo, a town of 2000 inhabitants, a few miles south of
Valladolid.

41: Alcala. There are several towns of this name. Probably Alcala de
Henares is meant, a city between Madrid and Saragossa.

42: encore un coup, "once more I say".

43: Qu'on m'ait fait pour hair, depends upon _honteux_, as does also
_de n'avoir pu_, etc. by a double construction.

44: Estramadoure, "Estramadura", formerly a province of Spain, west
of New Castile, on the borders of Portugal.

45: Ne te fais pas d'aimer une religion. "Do not sacrifice yourself
to love", _religion_ being used in the special sense of "sacred
obligation", "point of conscience", and _aimer_ being used
substantively.

46: Que le mien. See note 14.

47: Ne m'en veux pas de fuir. "Be not vexed with me for flying."

48: mes amis sont morts, meaning her eyes, drowned now in tears.

49: une amour. The plural of _amour_ is indiscriminately masculine
or feminine, in both prose and poetry; but the singular is now only
masculine in prose, and of either gender in poetry.

50: Qu'il en soit ainsi. "So be it!"

51: Ressaye ton harnois. "Put on again thine armor." _Harnois_
poetical for _harnais_.

52: Fait lever sur mes pas des gibiers de bourreau, "started
gallows-birdsupon my path."

53: sans pater, without _pater noster_; that is, unconfessed of their
sins.

54: Sforce, "Sforza". This family ruled as dukes of Milan from 1147
to 1535. Galeazzo Maria Sforza, who died in 1476, is probably meant
here, as he was a notorious and wicked tyrant; though possibly the
author is thinking of Giovanni Galeazzo Sforza, lord of Pesaro, the
first husband of Lucretia Borgia.

55: Borgia, Caesar Borgia, son of Pope Alexander VI, was Cardinal in
1492, murdered his own brother in 1497, was a cruel and bloodthirsty
tyrant in Romagna, and was held two years in captivity in Spain by
Ferdinand the Catholic, finally losing his wicked life in 1507.

56: Luther, born 1483, died 1546, would naturally seem to a
contemporary Spaniard a monster fit to be classed with Caesar Borgia.

57: soeur du festin des sept tetes, "a sister to the banquet of the
seven heads", alluding to the old Spanish story of the Seven Lords of
Lara, a favorite theme with ancient ballad-writers, and upon which two
of Lope de Vega's dramas are based: "Los Siete Infantes de Lara" and
"El Bastardo Mudarra". The seven sons of the Lord of Lara are said to
have been betrayed by their uncle (it is he who is meant in line 16)
to the Moors, who slew them. Their heads were served up at a banquet
to which their father was invited.

58: j'en jure, instead of _je le jure_, being perhaps an elliptical
expression in its origin for _j'en jure la verite_.

59: qu'elle eut hate a ce point de reluire a ton poing = _qu'elle eut
tellement hate de reluire a ton poing, quand nous_, etc.

60: C'est s'y prendre un peu tard, etc. "You are beginning a little
late to play the young man."

61: Boabdil, the last of the Moorish kings of Granada, driven out by
Ferdinand in 1492.

62: Mahom, an abbreviation of Mahomet; compare the English Mahound.

63: Mais qu'a cela ne tienne. "Why! do not let that hinder you."

64: Don Silvius. Like the Italians, and indeed with just as good
reason, many great Spanish families are fond of claiming descent from
the heroes of ancient Rome.

65: Toro. A city of 9000 inhabitants between Valladolid and Zamora.

66: Valladolid. A famous city in the former kingdom of Leon, in the
northwest of Spain, famous for its situation, its antiquity, its
memories. Columbus died there, in 1506.

67: Tribut des cent vierges. The reference is to a story told in the
_Romancero general_, to the effect that a hundred virgins were offered
to the Moors as ransom for a prisoner.

68: Ramire. There were several kings by the name of Ramiro in the
history of Aragon.

69: Grand maitre de Saint Jacque et de Calatrava. The orders of
knighthood of St. James (Santiago) and of Calatrava were founded for
the purpose of resisting the Moors.

70: Motril. A town on the Mediterranean, south of Granada and east of
Malaga.

71: Antequera. A town of 20,000 inhabitants in Andalusia, between
Ronda and Granada.

72: Suez. The editor can find no place of this name on the map
of Spain. Perry suggests that the author may mean Sueca, south of
Valencia.

73: Nijar. A small town near the Mediterranean coast, a few miles
from Almeria.

74: tient a Silva, "has something to do with the house of Silva", "is
affected by us".

75: Sandoval, Manrique, Lara, Alencastre. Names of great families.

76: Zamet, Arabic Achmed. The present editor (and every other
apparently) is ignorant of any Zamet in legend or history to whom this
could refer.

77: Car vous me la pairiez. "Because you would pay me a price for it,
would you not?" Don Ruy is continuing his own sentence, and alludes to
the head of Hernani.

78: notre, instead of _a nous_.

79: grand merci! The English "grammercy" is supposed to come from
this expression, though it has also been said to be a corruption of
"God have mercy!" Translate here: "Many thanks!" ironically.

80: The Duke of Alcala does not figure in the list of _dramatis
personae_, nor does he have a word to utter in the whole play.

81: que vite, "how quickly".

82: mon infante, "my princess".

83: malgre mes voeux, "against my will".

84: contente, imperative.

85: te laisseras-tu faire? "will you yield to me?"

86: see note 56, act IV.




ACT IV.


1: Aix la-Chapelle (Aachen) was the old Frankish capital. Charlemagne
held court there and at Engilenheim. He was buried there, A.D. 814,
in "that basilica which it had been the delight of his later years to
erect and adorn with the treasures of ancient art. His tomb under
the dome--where now we see an enormous slab, with the words 'Carolo
Magno'--was inscribed _Magnus atque Orthodoxus Imperator_". (Bryce:
"Holy Roman Empire".) Mr. Bryce adds: "This basilica was built upon
the model of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, and as
it was the first church of any size that had been erected in those
regions for centuries past, it excited extraordinary interest among
the Franks and Gauls. In many of its features it greatly resembles
the beautiful church of San Vitale, at Ravenna... Over the tomb of
Charles, below the central dome... there hangs a huge chandelier, the
gift of Frederick Barbarossa."

2: Monsieur l'electeur de Treves. The Archbishop of Trier stood out
for a long time in favor of Francis I.

3: Ou Rodolphe extermina Lothaire. The allusion is not clear.

4: Gotha, the Duke of Gotha, heading the list of nobles opposed to
the election of Charles.

5: croi, instead of _crois_, for the sake of the rhyme with _moi_. It
must be remembered that French rhymes are made for the eye, sometimes,
more than for the ear.

6: Lutzelbourg, the duchy of Luxembourg, sometimes, with the city of
that name, called (in German) Luetzelburg.

7: est trop grand de la tete, "is a head too tall", _i.e._, will be
decapitated before he has done.

8: Astorga, a town in the kingdom of Leon, in northwestern Spain.

9: Ont toujours fait doubler la solde du bourreau, probably means
that so many of them have been executed, and such large game too, that
their deaths have enriched the executioner.

10: deux hardis compagnons, "two bold fellows".

11: l'elargir, refers to _drap_ in the next line.

12: Un Saxon heretique. Frederick, Elector of Saxony, was born in
1463. He was a generous patron of learning, founded in 1502 the
University of Wittenberg, and lent his powerful protection to Luther,
though he never publicly declared himself a Protestant. His declining
the imperial crown on this occasion, in 1519, has been already
mentioned. He died in 1525.

13: Des princes de Hesse. This is a mistake, if Hugo means that a
prince of Hesse was one of the electors, as there were none of that
house until 1803, when Landgrave William IX of Hesse-Cassel became
Elector with the title William I.

14: Dans ma peau de lion emporter comme Hercule. Hugo probably
alludes here to the story of Hercules and the Cercopes, two
mischievous gnomes who annoyed Hercules in his sleep and were captured
by him and given to Omphale. Baumeister (Denkmaeler des klassischen
Alterthums, Vol. 1. p. 664) thinks that these impish creatures may
have been monkeys. I can find no statement that Hercules carried them
off in his lion's skin, but he is said to have strung them by their
feet to a pole.

15: Triboulet, a deformed court jester of King Francis I of France,
and the grotesque hero of Hugo's play "Le Roi s'amuse". Translate:
"would be a head shorter than Triboulet himself".

16: Gand, Tolede, Salamanque, Ghent, Toledo, Salamanca.

17: For cacophony this line would be hard to beat. It sounds like
the croaking of frogs; and there is no reason apparent why the author
should indulge in such a hideous eccentricity.

18: sauf, plus tard, a les reprendre, "with the mental reservation
that I _might_ take them back".

19: Vous vous couvrez? The wily Ricardo, hearing the king address him
familiarly with _tu_ (l. 17), which was the form of address from the
kings of Spain to grandees, whom they also called "cousin", puts on
his hat in the king's presence--another privilege of a grandee.

20: Baste, "enough", from the Italian _basta_.

21: Peut-etre on voudra d'un Cesar. "Perhaps she will put up with an
emperor."

22: Ce Corneille Agrippa pourtant en sait bien long! "And yet this
Cornelius Agrippa has great insight!" Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa
von Nettesheim, born 1486 at Cologne, died 1535 at Grenoble, was
a celebrated scholar, who filled various offices, of more or less
doubtful character, under the Emperor Maximilian I. and Francis I. He
wrote a satire "De incertitudine et vanitate scientiarum", and a work
against witchcraft, "De occulta philosophia", but had the reputation
of being a magician himself.

23: l'abbe Jean Tritheme. Johannes Tritheim, born in 1462 at
Trittenheim, near Trier, was a Benedictine monk, who became abbot of
St. James in Wuerzburg, where he died in 1516. He wrote a number of
semi-historical works, and had a reputation for supernatural wisdom.

24: comte de Limburg. Limburg was a duchy, west of Aachen, now
divided between Belgium and the Netherlands.

25: gardien capitulaire, guardian of the tomb of Charlemagne, by
appointment of the monastic chapter which had it in charge.

26: SCENE II. This is one of the most powerful passages in Victor
Hugo's writings. It would be hard to say to what extent the sentiments
here expressed were his personally. At any rate, it is a grandiloquent
exposition of the imperial idea. As Mr. H.A. Perry remarks, the poet
is evidently thinking, and with intense sympathy, of the aspirations
of Napoleon I. and his ambition to subject the Pope to himself. It
is in this scene that Charles is represented as changing from a
headstrong, frivolous, undisciplined libertine into a grave man made
noble by a sense of responsibility. It may be questioned whether so
sudden a transformation is possible, and certain it is that in the
play the Charles of the preceding part is not the same man as he who
emerges from the tomb of Charlemagne. It is improbable that the mere
heightening of a weak, bad man's ambition would make him good and
great in half an hour. But such contrasts are Hugo's delight.

27: un monde createur, meaning the Middle Ages, as an epoch fertile
in great institutions.

28: le hasard corrige le hasard, means that whatever the oppression
of the time, it is probable that the people will have a friend either
in the Pope or the Emperor, and if one is tyrannical the other may be
clement.

29: toujours l'ordre eclate, "order still springs forth".

30: Qu'une idee, au besoin des temps, un jour elose. "Let but a
thought, in the fulness of time, some day burst forth."

31: Se fait homme, "becomes incarnate".

32: These lines are packed with meaning, the principal idea being
that the will of the people and the will of God will from time to time
find personification in an elective Pope or an elective Emperor, and
triumph over hereditary sovereigns and time-honored prerogatives.

33: diete is the legislative assembly of the Empire, conclave the
assembly of cardinals to elect a Pope.

34: suaire, lit. "shroud"; but it is difficult to see why Hugo
chose this word for the papal mantle, unless helped there-to by the
necessity of finding a rhyme for _sanctuaire_.

35: Pierre et Cesar, en eux accouplant les deux Romes, the idea so
much insisted on by Dante in the De Monarchia and the Divine Comedy,
that the spiritual Rome of Peter's founding and the temporal Roman
Empire of Caesar's creation were divinely sanctioned, and necessary to
each other.

36: a larges pans, "on a generous scale".

37: la clef de voute, "the keystone".

38: ducs a fleurons, "dukes with flowered escutcheons."

39: nous arrive fanfare, "comes to us like trumpet-blast."

40: What follows, the vision of the People, is very characteristic of
Hugo, however unlike anything that Charles would have thought, and it
is nobly expressed.

41: l'etreignant. The antecedent of the _l'_ is _pyramide_.

42: sur ses hautes zones. The antecedent of _ses_ is _pyramide_.

43: des empires, the object of _verrait_.

44: son flux. The antecedent of _son_ is _flot_, in line 25.

45: The antecedent of _le_ and _il_ is _flot_ again.

46: Il n'aille pas me prendre, impersonal, "There came not over me a
giddiness."

47: seulement, "even".

48: dut en parlant, "even if in speaking".

49: dusses-tu me dire, see preface.

50: Qui vive? "Who goes there?"

51: etranger par sa mere, "a foreigner on his mother's side", the
Spanish side. See note 59, act I.

52: meure comme un Hebreu, a testimony to the constancy of the Jews
under persecution.

53: roue et tenailles mordantes, "the wheel (of torture) and the
biting (red-hot) pincers."

54: chevalets, "wooden horses": trestles with a sharp ridge, upon
which victims were set astride for torture.

55: lampes ardentes, "fires", applied with careful ingenuity to the
feet, generally.

56: Je te rends ce cor, see note 86, act III.

57: Avec Dieu dans ceci je suis d'intelligence, "God is on my side in
this."

58: des ce soir, simply, "this evening".

59: le traitre, meaning Charles, whom he considers the real traitor.

60: S'il perit, means Hernani.

61: sans nous y soustraire, "without ever giving up", "without
defection".

62: Jurons sur cette croix. His sword, like a crusader's, had a guard
at right angles to the hilt, thus forming across.

63: Connetable d'Espagne, by thus naming him the Emperor appoints
Alcala to this high office, and then in the same manner gives Almunan
the Admiralty of Castile, a position of great honor.

64: Majeste! The sycophant Ricardo is the first to proffer the new
title, which was supposed to belong to emperors alone. Charles,
however, is said to have caused it to be employed towards himself
while yet only King of Spain.

65: Alcade du palais. "Governor of the palace."

66: Deux electeurs. This is not correct. The news of his election was
brought from Frankfort to Charles at Barcelona by the Count Palatine.
The Duke of Bavaria was not at that time an elector.

67: chambre doree. The election took place in the splendid hall of a
building in Frankfort known as the Roemer.

68: roi des Romains. One of the concomitant titles of the Emperor was
King of the Romans. When an Emperor was so fortunate as to be crowned
at Rome he assumed the clamys and sandals of a Roman patrician, and
great sanctity was attached to this dignity as perpetuating the line
of the ancient city.

69: frere de Boheme. Kings then as now addressed each other as "my
brother".

70: vous etes familier, "I count you as an intimate friend."

71: J'y suis! "I have succeeded."

72: son poignard, see act II, scene 2.

73: au mur de Balthazar, "on Belshazzar's wall". See the Book of
Daniel, v. 5.

74: Les rois Rodrigue font les comtes Julien. Roderick, King of
Andalusia, assumed sway over all Spain in 709. In the opposition was a
certain Count Julian, commander of the Gothic forces in Morocco, who
betrayed his master's forces to the Saracens. These, victorious in
Africa, crossed into Spain and defeated and killed Roderick in 711.
He has been called the last of the Goths, and is the subject of an
ambitious poem by Robert Southey. According to Spanish legend, as
embodied in ancient ballads, the treachery of Count Julian was an act
of revenge for the dishonoring of his sister by King Roderick.

75: Segorbe, a town in Valencia, in eastern Spain.

76: Cordona, a small town in Catalonia, in northeastern Spain.

77: Monroy, Monroyo, a small town in eastern Spain, a few miles west
of Tortosa.

78: Albatera, a village in Valencia, in eastern Spain.

79: Gor. Venta de Gor is a small village a few miles north of
Granada.

80: grand maitre d'Avis. The order of Avis was a Portuguese
decoration.

81: penser, infinitive used as noun.

82: Laisse regner l'esprit. Speaking to his heart, he bids it cease
to disturb his mind, which is full of lofty purposes.

83: The Austrian coat of arms contains a double-headed eagle with an
escutcheon on its breast.

84: Saint Etienne, Saint Stephen.

85: miseres du roi, "pettiness of the king".

86: Le Danois a punir, perhaps an allusion to the fact that the
Danish parliament was one of the first large political bodies to defy
the Pope and set up a national church (1527).

87: Le Saint-Pere a payer. Pope Leo X adroitly avoided declaring
himself for either Charles or Francis, yet maintained such a position
that the successful competitor should consider himself his debtor.

88: Venise. Robertson says that the "views and interest of the
Venetians were not different from those of the Pope", and yet that
they sided with Francis, because they had more to fear and to hope
from him.

89: Soliman. Soliman the Magnificent, Emperor of Constantinople, was
knocking loudly at the doors of western Europe, and one of the reasons
why Frederick the Wise declined his election was that Charles would
prove a stronger power against the Turks.




ACT V.


1: cherchant fortune, "a-courting".

2: Vouliez-vous pas qu'il mit son cercueil de la noce? "You wouldn't
have him drag his coffin into the wedding?"

3: lui fait ombre, "disturbs him".

4: Pourpoint de comte, empli de conseils d'alguazil, "Count's
doublet, full of wise saws and modern instances."

5: Il n'avait garde. "He was careful not to."

6: Il trouve a qui parler. "I am not afraid of a conversation with
him."

7: par la rampe de l'escalier, "along the balustrade of the
stairway".

8: Quelque mauvais plaisant, "some would-be joker".

9: en attendant l'enfer, "before he comes to fetch us to hell".

10: C'est un plaisant drole, "He's a queer lot!" Here _plaisant_ is
the adjective; in note 1, preface, it was the noun.

11: celle-ci, "this dance".

12: In prose this would be: _qu'avec vous mon mari les compte_.

13: Il compte, "He keeps time".

14: Saint Jacques monseigneur, "By my lord St. James!"

15: amie, "my dear".

16: Vienne ma dona Sol, "Let but my dona Sol come", etc.

17: Qu'on nous laisse, "Let them but leave us".

18: mis de la sorte, "dressed in this way".

19: Two weak and superfluous lines.

20: Seriez vous dans cette serenade de moitie! "Have you not had a
hand in this serenade?"

21: Ce devrait etre fait. "This must be ended."

22: Fusse-je votre fille. "Even were I your daughter."

23: Qu'ils sont heureux! A phrase of great power. Observe also that
Hernani suppresses almost all evidence of his pain in the presence of
Dona Sol.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hernani, by Victor Hugo

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERNANI ***

This file should be named 7hrnn10.txt or 7hrnn10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 7hrnn11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 7hrnn10a.txt

Produced by Stan Goodman, Anne Dreze, Marc D'Hooghe and the PG
Online Distributed Proofreaders.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

